# Drop Manual V1 07 (Pages 16-30)

> Converted from PDF using `pymupdf4llm`. Source: `/Users/ethan.stark/dev/misc/audio-midi/pdf/Drop_Manual_v1_07.pdf`.

---

## Page 16

**Output** The physical port USB1-2 or TRS1-4 on which Drop sends MIDI out to the device


**Input** The physical port USB1-2 or TRS1-4 on which Drop receives data from the device.


**Sub-Port** Only relevant when the device is connected via USB. Some USB devices offer multiple

internal Sub-Ports for communication. Sub-Port 1 works just fine for most USB gear.


_If communication to your USB device fails and it offers more than one Sub-Port, try another one._
_Unfortunately, sub-ports are often not documented in the device s user manual. You simply ’_
_have to try._



_Example: This is how a synth with two USB_
_sub-ports shows up in Ableton Live._



For the nerds: The Sub-Port corresponds to the cable number CN in the USB MIDI protocol. Sub-ports are also reffered to as virtual cables.


_Note: In the clock menu, you can specify to which sub-ports clock and transport messages are being sent._


Gear with MIDI mapping table - Synths and grooveboxes


Enable MIDI Output, and only enable MIDI Input if needed: For example, if the device can send MIDI data back to Drop when turning its knobs, you

can use convenient MIDI Learn for mapping. You should also enable the MIDI Input, if the device includes a MIDI sequencer or a keyboard whose

notes you want to forward to other connected devices.


Gear for MIDI Input only - Keyboards


Usually there is no need to enable MIDI Output, picking only a MIDI Input port is sufficient. To setup MIDI forwarding to another device, use the

target device s MERGER function, described on the following pages.’


Gear with own MIDI mapping - DAWs and workstations


Generally, you should enable both, MIDI Input and Output, and do the mapping on your DAW or workstation. You might also prefer USB over TRS

MIDI. Usually, DAWs and workstations offer their own internal MIDI Learn function and parameter mapping. Use _MENU > Project > DAW Init_ to

quickly apply a default initialization for use with a DAW.


16

---

## Page 17

**Program Change Pre-Delay** This is a useful feature for grooveboxes that need to receive program

change messages just a little bit before their internal sequencer s pattern ends. ’


Let s assume, you schedule a snapshot in Drop mode fires at the end of a cycle and that snapshot contains’ ( )

a program change message to tell your groovebox to switch to the next pattern. The groovebox may need

to know about the pattern change a little earlier, just before the pattern ends, so it has some

time left to prepare everything for the pattern change. This is what we call a pre-delay. You can select from

different values, like a fixed number of milliseconds or tempo-dependent values like 3/16th notes.


_You want the Program Change Pre-Delay to be as small as possible and as large as necessary._
_Sequencer-based devices (grooveboxes) may need a time-related value like 3/16th notes, while synths_
_may need a fixed amount of time to load a new preset._


You simply have to try out which pre-delay value works best for your device.


card. This database contains mapping tables of popular MIDI gear and simplifies the mapping process.


more convenient.


[The database can be found on https://github.com/pencilresearch/midi](https://github.com/pencilresearch/midi)


has when downloading it.


17

---

## Page 18

#### **Devices Merger**

Drop s MIDI merger allows you to forward MIDI input data to a’

MIDI output. You can even modify incoming data before it gets

forwarded, like transposing MIDI notes.


_Use case:_

You want to control your synth by Drop s controls, but it should’

also receive notes from a MIDI keyboard. However, your synth

only has one MIDI-In port. This means, the MIDI data from Drop s’

controls must be merged together with the MIDI data from the

keyboard.


18



_Example: Merging a MIDI sequencer, a keyboard and Drop s control elements to ’_
_a synth. Notes can be transposed by Drop s control elements along the way.’_

---

## Page 19

In order to do this, you need to create two devices on Drop: One for the synth and one for the keyboard. The synth device needs to have a MIDI

Output port selected, the keyboard must have a MIDI Input port.


Now, in the _Devices_ menu, select the receiving device the synth with the lower two buttons dark blue . Scroll down to the MERGER part. Select ( ) ( )

Merger 1-4 with the upper buttons light blue and turn the switch ON to activate the Merger. ( )


_Each device has its own 4 Merger instances. That means, per device you can forward up to 4 different MIDI input streams, which come from_
_other connected devices._



**Merge** Activate the merger instance.


**Input** The device from which this merger instance receives incoming MIDI

data. Obviously, the selected device must have a MIDI Input enabled.


**Listen to Channels** Select the MIDI channels on which the input device sends

the relevant data. This does not necessarily have to match the receiver s MIDI’

channel. It should simply cover the channels which carry the data that is

relevant for the MIDI stream you want to capture.


_Use Drop s MIDI monitor to inspect the MIDI data that comes in. ’_
_Set the message filters and channel selection in a way, so that the_
_receiving device only gets MIDI data it actually understands. Avoid_
_unnecessary MIDI traffic for best responsiveness._



Select the Merger instance
Here: Merger 1 out of 4


Activate the Merger


Select the output device
Here: Device 3 out of 8
named WARP



_Note: Incoming SysEx messages are not forwarded to the receiver. This is because SysEx could potentially block the whole traffic as long as_
_the sender wants._



19

---

## Page 20

As a best-practice, you should configure your input device first, so that it only sends relevant data and

does not spam unnecessary messages around. Do this as far as possible, and filter out the rest in Drop s’

MIDI Merger.


**Notes** Filter On/Off for MIDI note events


**Bank, CC** Filter On/Off for CC messages. This also includes 14-bit CC messages, NRPN messages and

Bank Select messages.


**Pitchbend** On/Off filter MIDI pitchbend data.


**Aftertouch** On/Off filter MIDI aftertouch, including channel pressure and polyphonic key pressure.


**Prog Chg** On/Off filter MIDI program change messages


**Target Channel** _No Change:_ Leave the MIDI channel as it comes in.

_By Device:_ Modify the channel to the device s Default Channel.’

_Channel 1-16:_ Modify the channel to this channel number.

**Note Gate** Enables mute/unmute functionality for incoming MIDI notes.


_Off:_ Note Gate function disabled.

_On:_ Note Gate enabled. Control element max value = notes pass, min = blocked

_On, inverted:_ Note Gate enabled. Control element max = notes blocked, min = pass.

**Link** Link one of the control elements to the Note Gate function. Press Link“ …”, so the control

elements will start to blink. Then, turn/move/push the control element you want to assign.


**clear** Push the menu encoder to clear the assigned control element.


20



Enable only the MIDI message types

your target synth should receive

---

## Page 21

The merger also offers note transposition. Notes can be shifted by semitones and octaves. Both menus
are similar.


**Semitone / Octave** Enables note semitone/octave shifting functionality for incoming MIDI notes.


**Shift/Min** The lower boundary of the shifting range. If no Link is set, MIDI notes are always shifted by

that number of semitones/octaves.


**Max** The upper boundary of the shifting range. If a Link is set, the MIDI note shifting range goes

from the minimum to the maximum value.


**Link** Link one of the control elements to the octave shift function. Press Link“ …”, so the control

elements will start to blink. Then, turn/move/push the control element you want to assign.


**clear ←** Push the menu encoder to clear the assigned control element.


_Tip: When linking a rotary control to note shifting, you can also select one of the stepped LED_
_feedback options, so the LED ring jumps in discrete steps instead of moving continuously. Additionally,_
_you can assign the push function of the rotary control to reset the rotary knob to the center/left/right_
_position and thereby reset the transposition._


_Note: When the MIDI cable of a sequencer or keyboard is pulled out while some notes are still on,_
_they will stay on forever as the receiving synth never receives the corresponding Note-Off message._
_This is a classic thing to happen with MIDI, and requires a note panic to be sent which will stop all“_ _”_
_notes. You can force a note panic by pushing Shift + MENU or stopping playback._


21

---

## Page 22

## **Mapping**

Once you have set up your devices, we can start mapping the controls! But first things first… There are two main categories of MIDI receiving

devices that you should be aware of.

#### **Devices with fixed mapping table synths, grooveboxes( )**

Most synths and grooveboxes offer a MIDI mapping table in their manual, which is a list of device parameters e.g. volume, cutoff frequency, etc. ( )

that can be remotely controlled via MIDI. The device expects a specific MIDI message e.g. CC message #13 value range 0-127 per parameter and ( )

you need to configure your MIDI sender Drop to transmit exactly that message in order to control that parameter. ( )


_For devices with a fixed MIDI table, it is best practice to start off with an empty project and populate Drop s controls bit by bit. ’_


This kind of mapping can be quite a bit of work. Therefore, Drop offers different ways to help you get through this process as fast as possible.


  - Look up the MIDI mapping table of your synth and manually enter the MIDI message type, numbers, value ranges on Drop.


  - Your device can send MIDI out when you turn its knobs? Great! You can use MIDI learn on Drop which significantly speeds up the mapping

process. First, ensure your device actually sends MIDI data often, this must be enabled in its settings and connect the device s MIDI out to ( ) ’

Drop s MIDI in, so that communication works in both directions. Also ensure that in Drop s Device settings, you enabled and selected the ’ ’

corresponding MIDI input. On Drop, you can go to _PLAY > Monitor_ to check and verify the incoming and outgoing messages.


  - If your device is listed in the Pencil Research MIDI database on Drop s SD-card, you can select the device parameter from the database. This is ’

a convenient alternative to look up the parameter name in the device s manual and entering the MIDI control parameters by hand on Drop.’


_Example of a typical MIDI mapping table, taken from the_
_Elektron Rytm MK1 manual_


22

---

## Page 23

#### **Devices with MIDI learn DAW, workstations( )**

Software DAWs e.g. Ableton Live or hardware workstations e.g. Akai MPC series have so many parameters that it is just too many for a fixed ( ) ( )

mapping table. Instead, they offer a MIDI-Learn function to map parameters to incoming MIDI messages. For the DAW, it doesn t matter which ’

specific MIDI message your controller sends, as long as it is a unique message per control.


Go to Project > DAW Init to quickly apply a default mapping to use Drop with a DAW. This function sets MIDI messages to each of Drop s control ’

elements at once, so that each control element sends out a different MIDI CC or MIDI note message.


_Example of MIDI mapping in a DAW (Ableton Live)_


23

---

## Page 24

#### **Control element configuration**

element.


its settings from before.


element, its name is displayed on the screen when in PLAY view. You can disable this in the settings.


**Behavior** Describes the physical behavior of the control element. It is different, depending on the

type of control element.






|Rotary knob turn|Precision|Slow turning speed for precise adjustments.|
|---|---|---|
||_Dynamic Pot_|Emulates potentiometer behavior, so that the physical position corresponds to the LED ring. When turning<br>slowly, precise adjustments are possible, though.|
||_Dynamic Fast_|Sensitive to manual movement. When turning slowly, precise adjustments are still possible, though.|
|_Rotary knob push_|_Toggle_|Pressing the rotary knob functions as a separate MIDI button. Each push alternately sends the MIDI min or<br>max value and turns the button on or off.|
||_Temporary_|Pressing the rotary knob functions as a separate MIDI button. When pressed, the MIDI maximum value is sent;<br>when released, the minimum value is sent._ Use this setting with a DAW that sends MIDI feedback to Drop._|
||_Quick Turn_|While pressed, the turning knob speed is 4x faster.|
||_Reset Left/_<br>_Center/Right_|Resets the rotary to its left/center/right position when pressed.|



24

---

## Page 25

|Mute button|Toggle|Each push alternately sends the MIDI min or max value and turns the button on or off.|
|---|---|---|
||_Temporary_|When pressed, the MIDI maximum value is sent; when released, the minimum value is sent. Use this setting<br>with a DAW that sends MIDI feedback to Drop.|
|_Fader_|_Layer AB dual_|Layer A and B offer their own separate faders, similar to Rotary knobs and Mute buttons.|
||_Layer A only_|The fader of Layer A is in permanent operation, even when on Layer B.<br>This setting is convenient if you do not need a separate fader on Layer B and want permanent access without<br>value-catch to the fader on Layer A.<br>As the faders can not automatically change their physical position, it is required to manually move the fader<br>cap to the underlying virtual position before the fader reacts to manual movement.|


**LED style** Only accessible for rotary knob turn. Choose from different LED ring styles.

|Rotary knob turn|Line from left|For 0-100% unidirectional values. A line of LEDs ranging from 0 to the knob ’s position.|
|---|---|---|
||_Line from center_|For ±100% bidirectional values. A line of LEDs ranging from the top to knob s position on the left or right side.<br>’|
||_Dot_|Universal minimalist setting that only shows an LED dot at the knob s internal position.<br>’|
||_1-25 Steps_|Using the single LEDs of the LED ring to visualize discrete steps.<br>_Example use case:_<br>_Mapping a rotary knob to an oscillator s octave setting. Assume the range goes from_<br>_’_<br>_-2 to +2 octaves, that makes 5 steps (-2, -1, 0, +1, +2) and you get a nice visualization with the 5 Steps setting._|
||_Blank_|The internal value is not shown at all.<br>This LED style is useful in combination with the Relative MIDI output curve. In this mode, the rotary knob<br>“<br>”<br>does not send its internal absolute position, but instead only its relative change if it is turned left or right. Your<br>target application may require relative MIDI data for scrolling through DAW clip scenes or a file list in a<br>browser. In such cases, the internal value of the rotary knob is also irrelevant, so we don t need to show it.<br>’|



25

---

## Page 26

**Drop Prio** When the control element is used in a snapshot that is fired in Drop mode, you can

select _Normal_ or _PreDrop_ priority. This affects micro timing of MIDI messages in a Drop.


_Normal_ Use this by default. The MIDI output of the control element is sent right after the Drop.


_PreDrop_ The MIDI output of the control element is sent right before the Drop and a second time

right after the Drop.


_Example use case:_


own internal sequencer. You also have a snapshot that re-enables the kick drum.


When firing this snapshot in Drop mode, it musically releases the energy after a peak moment. With

_Normal_ priority, the MIDI message for Mute re-enable is sent an instant after the Drop moment, but it

might be just too late and we might miss out the first kick at the downbeat of the new bar.


By enabling _PreDrop_ priority, the Mute enable message is sent additionally just before the Drop moment, which ensures the kick is enabled at the

downbeat of the next bar.


**CV Out link** Shows, if a control element is mapped to the CV OUT 1 or 2 jack.


You can use the control elements not only to send out MIDI, but also to control the two CV outputs. The CV outputs may be configured as clock

signals, but they can also be used as simple variable linear voltage outputs in MENU > CV Config. There, you can also set the voltage range 0,0 to (

5,0 Volts, 12-bit DAC .)


_The actual linkage of a control element to a CV output is in MENU > CV Config._


**Merge link** Shows, if the control element is linked to any parameter in a Device Merger.


You can use the control elements not only to send out MIDI, but also to manipulate incoming MIDI data that passes through the Device Merger. The

Device Merger offers manipulation of incoming MIDI data before it is redirected to another device e.g. note transposition . The manipulation ( )

parameters can be mapped to Drop s control elements. ’


_The actual linkage of a control element to a Merger parameter is in MENU > Devices._


26

---

## Page 27

**Feedback by MIDI-In**


Drop s control elements can not only send out MIDI data,’

they can also be remotely controlled by receiving MIDI, also

called Feedback. You can enable MIDI feedback separately

for each control element.


However, if you enable MIDI Feedback, it must always

correspond to one of the slots for MIDI-Output. These are

the requirements:


- The MIDI device linked to the slot must have a MIDI-Input

port set in _MENU > Devices._


- Slot curve should be set to _Linear_, as incoming feedback

messages will also be mapped in a linear way back to the

control element s position.’


- NRPN messages are not supported for MIDI feedback


_Hardware gear usually does not send MIDI feedback when_
_switching programs/presets, as it would most likely cause_
_traffic overload. MIDI feedback is only sent when turning a_
_knob on the device. This raises the question, if MIDI feedback_
_is necessary for hardware gear at all. DAWs however offer_
_good support for MIDI feedback._


27

---

## Page 28

MIDI Learn
A convenient way to
learn the MIDI
parameters as the
hardware device sends
them. First, verify that
the device sends MIDI
back to Drop as you
move its knobs.


#### **MIDI Output slots**

Each control element offers eight slots for different MIDI Output messages to different devices.


**Slot** Activate the slot.


**Device** Select one of the eight devices configured in _MENU > Devices_


**Channel** The MIDI channel 1-16. Select by device to use the default channel of the device.“ ”


**Msg Type** The MIDI message type. These message types are available:



MIDI Database
If your hardware device
is featured in the
database, this is an
alternative to looking up
MIDI parameters in
device s manual. ’
Select the database file
in the device menu first.













|Note On|Buttons + snapshots<br>only|Mostly used for on/off parameters.|
|---|---|---|
|_CC_|All controls + snapshots|Most commonly used control change message.|
|_CC 14_<br>_CC 14 LSB first_|All controls + snapshots|Two consecutive CC messages for high 14-bit resolution.<br>Typically used for coarse and fine adjustment of a<br>parameter. LSB or MSB first default<br>(<br>)|
|_NRPN_|All controls + snapshots|Some hardware devices offer NRPN access to their<br>parameters, which offers high 14-bit resolution and<br>more parameter numbers than CC. If your device offers<br>both CC and NRPN for the same parameter, CC has<br>lower resolution but is preferred for fast response times.|
|_Pitchbend_|All controls + snapshots|Pitchbend message type, 14-bit resolution.|
|_Aftertouch_|All controls + snapshots|Channel pressure message type.|
|_ProgChg_|Snapshots|Program change message, commonly used to switch<br>presets or patterns, value range 0-127.|
|_Prog + Bank_|Snapshots|Bank select and program change afterwards. Required<br>by some devices that offer more than 128<br>presets/patterns.|


28



Select the mapping slot
Here: Slot 2 out of 8. Slots

1, 2, 4 are set active.

---

## Page 29

Invert
Switches Min and Max
value, which inverts the
curve on the Y-axis.



**Message #** The message number. If the message type requires it, this may be split into MSB and

LSB (most significant and least significant

byte .)


On the next page, the output range and curve of the slot can be set.


**Max** The upper limit of the output curve.


**Min** The lower limit of the output curve.


Depending on the message type, Min and Max may have different value ranges. For example, Note

On and CC messages range from 0 to 127, while NRPN and CC 14-bit go from 0 to 16383 and

pitchbend from -8192 to +8191. These are simply the values the MIDI protocol offers.


_Shift + Turn the menu encoder to do coarse / fine value adjustments._


**Curve** Only available for faders and rotary knobs.


Select from several output curve types: Linear, Exponential, only the left or right half, On-Off



_Default Linear curve_



Duplicate
Copy-and-paste the

current slot to the

next free one.





29

---

## Page 30

#### **MIDI Learn**

Drop can listen to incoming MIDI messages, pick a message, and apply its parameters to a control element as outgoing MIDI message.

This is how it works: Some hardware devices can send MIDI on their output port when turning a potentiometer or changing a parameter. Usually, this

is the same message type, channel and number which the device also expects as input to control the parameter.


First, _make sure the connected device actually sends MIDI output for parameter changes_ . Many devices require this option to be activated in their

settings first. Also, _connect the MIDI output of your hardware device to one of Drop s MIDI inputs’_, or use USB instead.


When in _MENU > Mapping_, enter the slot you want to map and push the _Learn button_ on the top right.

Now, Drop shows live recording of incoming MIDI messages. _On the device, move the parameter you want to map_, and Drop should receive the

corresponding MIDI messages. Use the lower two buttons to select another MIDI input port if necessary.


Press the upper right button to _stop live recording_, then scroll through the history list and _select the message you want to map_ by pushing the menu

encoder.


Usually, it is the newest message top position, but( )

sometimes a device parameter sends several

messages at once, so you can select the right

message from the history list.


If you only need your device s incoming MIDI’

messages for MIDI Learn, you can remove the cable

again after mapping.


_Note: Messages that can not be assigned to the_

_control element are shown in red. E.g. Note messages_

_can not be assigned to rotary encoders and faders._


30
