# Force - User Guide - V3.3 (Pages 361-375)

> Converted from PDF using `pymupdf4llm`. Source: `/Users/ethan.stark/dev/misc/audio-midi/pdf/Force - User Guide - v3.3.pdf`.

---

## Page 361

**Saving and Exporting the Arrangement**


**To save and export your arrangement,** press the **Save** button, and then select **Audio Mixdown** . In this window, you
can mixdown or stem your arrangement into individual files.


**To set the time range that you want to mixdown,** use the **Start Bar** and **End Bar** fields under Audio Length. You
can add a number of seconds to the end of the mixdown to capture any ringing notes or effects (such as a reverb tail)
by adjusting the **Audio Tail** field.


**To set the parameters for the audio mixdown,** use the fields under **Render Source** and **Render Options** . Check
the **Separate Tracks** box to render each track of the arrangement as stems.


**To configure the audio mixdown file settings,** use the fields at the bottom of the screen to set the **File Format**, **Bit**
**Depth**, and **Sample Rate** .


You can also export the arrangement as a clip row in an ALS file to use with Ableton Live.


**To save the arrangement as a clip row,** press the **Save** button and tap **Ableton Live Set** to bring up the Ableton
Live Set Export popup, and then select the **Export Arrange as Clips** option.


361

---

## Page 362

**MIDI Improvements**


Force now supports multi-MIDI control, making Force the ultimate MIDI sequencing studio centerpiece. In addition to
getting the most out of the MIDI DIN ports on your Force hardware, you can now use your hardware's USB ports to
connect class-compliant MIDI devices such as USB keyboards, MIDI interfaces and USB-to-CV modules, allowing you to
dramatically increase the MIDI input and output capabilities of Force.


**Note:** To use multiple USB MIDI devices with standalone Force, we recommend using a high-quality, powered USB hub.


**Configuring MIDI**


**To configure the MIDI Inputs and Outputs,** go to _**Preferences**_ _>_ _**MIDI / Sync**_ .


The **Input Ports** section displays all available MIDI input ports in a list. Double-tap the **keyboard icon** to rename a port
to a custom name. This is particularly useful when using multiple devices connected to a single MIDI interface or hub, as
you can name the ports according to the devices connected to them. The custom port names will be reflected throughout
the internal software.


Next to each MIDI input port are the **Global, Control,** and **Track** buttons:


  - When **Global** is enabled, MIDI data from this port will always go to the current track. The Force Pads are an
example of a device that is always Global.


  - When **Control** is enabled, MIDI data from this port will be sent to MIDI Learn.


  - When **Track** is enabled, this MIDI port will appear in the list of available track MIDI Inputs.


The **Output Ports** section displays all available MIDI output ports in a list. Double-tap the **keyboard icon** to rename a
port to a custom name.


Next to each MIDI output port are the **Sync** and **Track** buttons:


  - When **Sync** is enabled, the MIDI output port will send MIDI sync messages according to the type set in the
Preferences menu under **MIDI / Sync >** **Sync Send > Send** .


  - When **Track** is enabled, the MIDI output port will appear in the list of available track MIDI Outputs.


By default, the **Track Enable Ports When Discovered** option is set to **On** so that when any MIDI device is plugged in,
the **Track** option is automatically enabled so the ports can be selected as an available MIDI input or output.


**Note:** The controls of some MIDI devices may be automatically mapped to certain Force controls, such as MIDI CC#7:
Volume being mapped to MIDI volume when using a MIDI track. This may cause unintentional changes when adjusting
the controls. To avoid this, you may need to reassign the affected MIDI CC on your controller. MIDI assignments can be
viewed in _**Macros**_ mode by viewing the MIDI Mode controls.


362

---

## Page 363

**To configure the MIDI Input and Output for a track, do either of the following:**


 - In **Matrix** mode or **Arrange** mode, double-tap the track header for a MIDI track to open the **Track Settings** window.
Use the **MIDI Routing** options to set the **MIDI Input Port** and **Channel**, the **MIDI Send** track where the MIDI is sent,
and the **MIDI Monitor** status.


 - In **Mixer** mode, select the **I/O** tab to view the MIDI track channel strip.


You can now also send MIDI from one track to another to layer two or more sound generators. For example, to layer two
plugin instruments:


1. Press the **Mixer** button to open the Mixer, or press **Menu** and tap **Mixer** . Then, select the **I/O** tab.


2. Create a new **Plugin** track by tapping the **+** button to the right of the last created track. Select a plugin instrument
and preset.


3. Create a second new **Plugin** track by repeating the steps above. Select a new plugin instrument and preset.


4. In the first plugin track's channel strip, use the **Send To** field to select the second plugin track.


5. Now, any note input or MIDI from the first plugin track will automatically be sent to the second plugin track as well,
giving you a quick and easy way to layer two sounds.


This can also be done in **Matrix** mode by double-tapping the track headers to open the **Track Settings** window.


**MIDI Recording**


For recording, MIDI Tracks now have an **Input Monitor** button with four states:


  - **Off:** The track's MIDI input is not monitored, and playback of recorded events will be heard. This setting is useful
when using keyboards with Local Control active.


  - **In:** The track's MIDI input is always monitored regardless of the track's Record Arm state, and playback from
recorded events will not be heard.


  - **Auto:** The track's MIDI input is monitored when the track is record armed, and playback of recorded events will
be heard.


  - **Merge:** The track's MIDI input is always monitored, and playback of recorded events will be heard.


**MIDI Track Program Changes**


You can now send a program change message from a MIDI track when launching a clip or playing your arrangement.


Press and hold **Edit** and press the corresponding pad for the clip to open the Clip Setting window. Alternatively, tap and
hold on the clip in Matrix View on the screen.


To send a program change message when launching a clip, set the **Program Change** field in the Clip Setting window to
**From Clip** . Use the **MIDI** **Program Change** and **Bank Change** fields


Program change messages added to a clip can also be recorded into the arrangement as an automation parameter by
setting the automation button in the pull-down project menu to **Write** .


363

---

## Page 364

**Macro Controls**


Force's **Knobs** mode has been renamed **Macros**, and you can now use it to assign multiple parameters to the knobs,
pads, screen and crossfader, making Force the ultimate control surface for interacting with all the automation parameters
in your project. This section also includes an envelope follower, which allows you to use an audio signal such as a kick
drum as a control signal to create side-chain or modulation effects.


**To enter Macros mode,** do either of the following:


  - Press **Menu** and then tap **Macros** .


  - Press and hold the **Edit** button and then press the **Knobs** button or touch a **knob** .


**Getting Started**


Use the tabs at the bottom of the screen to select a control to assign parameters to: _**Knobs**_, _**Crossfader**_, _**XY Pad**_, _**Pad**_
_**Grid**_, or _**Env Follower**_ .


The left side of the screen shows the selected control. Use the **Mode** field at the top to switch between the different
modes for each control.


The right side of the screen shows the parameters assigned to the selected controls, and the tools for adding and editing
these parameters.


The **yellow Learn** button at the top right of the screen is used to add parameters to a control in user assignable modes.


**To learn macro assignments:**


1. Enter Macros mode.


2. Select a macro control type by tapping one of the buttons
at the bottom of the screen: _**Knobs**_, _**Crossfader**_, _**XY Pad**_,
_**Pad Grid**_ or _**Env Follower**_ . See the following sections for
more information on each control type.


3. Select the desired mode for the control by using the **Mode**
field at the top of the screen. See each following section for
explanation of the available modes for each Macros
control.


364

---

## Page 365

4. When one of these modes is selected, the yellow **Learn** button and the **learn add** (+) button will appear on
the screen. To learn a single parameter to the control, tap the yellow **Learn** button so it is highlighted. The
OLED screen above the selected knob will show **LEARNING…** .


5. Next, navigate to the mode that displays the parameter you would like to learn, and then adjust that parameter.
The screen will show a message, "Learned [parameter] to [macro control]."


6. To lock in the assignment, return to Macros mode and tap the yellow **Learn** button again. The assigned
parameters will be shown when the macro control is selected.


**To learn multiple parameters to a macro,** simply navigate to more parameters while **Learn** is engaged (step 4).


**To learn another parameter to a macro that replaces the previous parameter,** tap the **down arrow** next to the
yellow **Learn** button, and then uncheck the **Add** box. Repeat the steps above to replace the previously learned
parameter with a new one.


**To learn a new parameter while also setting it to a range of values,** tap the **down arrow** next to the yellow **Learn**
button, and then check the **Range** box. While Learn is engaged (step 4 above), adjust the parameter to the low and
high points of the value range that you want to control. When the assignment is locked in, the macro will control the
parameter in the set value range.


**To use a single macro to, for example, mute/unmute multiple tracks at the same time,** tap the **down arrow** next
to the yellow **Learn** button, and then check the **Toggle** box. Repeat the steps above to learn a parameter, which will
toggle on/off when the control is touched or moved.


**To use a macro to send the max value of a parameter,** tap the **down arrow** next to the yellow **Learn** button, and
then check the **Trigger** box. Repeat the steps above to learn a parameter, which will send its maximum value when
the control is touched or moved.


Alternatively, you can add parameters by tapping the **learn add** (+) button, and then using the menu that appears to select
a parameter from your project.


**To copy an existing macro assignment:**


1. Tap the **learn add (+)** button to open the parameter menu.


2. Select **Copy Existing Macro** .


3. To replace the current macro settings with the copied macro settings, select **Replace** .


4. To merge the current macro settings with the copied macro settings, select **Merge** .


5. Use the menu to select the existing macro you would like to copy.


Note that you can copy between different macro control types, such as knobs and crossfader.


Use the **Momentary** button to set the behavior of the macro. When
highlighted, the selected Macro will only be enabled momentarily when
the control is touched or moved. When deselected, the selected Macro
will toggle on and off when the control is touched or moved.


Tap the arrow next to **Momentary** to adjust additional settings for when
the macro control is released.


**To revert the macro parameter(s) to its minimum value on**
**release,** check the **Go to Minimum** box.


**To revert to the last value state before the macro was changed**
**on release,** check to **Go to Previous** box.


**To rename a macro,** tap the **keyboard icon** in the toolbar, and then use the keyboard to enter a new name.


365

---

## Page 366

**Editing Macro Assignments**


Under the toolbar, the right side of the screen is split into two areas: at the top, the parameters that have been learned to
the macro are shown; at the bottom, the collapsible parameter inspector displays the settings for the currently selected
learned parameter.


**To edit the parameters assigned to a macro:**


1. Tap the macro control on the left side of the screen, or touch
or move the control on the Force, to select it.


2. Tap the learned parameter that you would like to adjust on the
left side of the screen so it is highlighted gray.


3. Use the parameter inspector to view and adjust the settings for
the assignment. Tap the **arrow** to view additional settings.


**To reverse the polarity of the knob,** tap the **Flip** button.


**To adjust the minimum and maximum values sent by**
**the knob,** use the two **Parameter Range** knobs.


**To set the response curve of the macro,** use the **Control**
**Input** field to select **Linear**, **Logarithmic** or **Exponential** .
Use the knobs next to this field to set the percentage of the
control that will be active.


**To adjust the behavior of the macro,** use the **Toggle**
selector. When set to **Off**, moving the control sends a
continuous range of values. When set to **Toggle**, moving
the control toggles between the minimum and maximum
values set above. When set to **Trigger Max**, moving the
control always send the maximum value.


**To remove a parameter assignment,** tap the **trash can** icon. If all parameters are removed, the macro will no longer
appear.


You can also quickly edit macro controls using the hardware **Edit Buttons** :


**To edit an existing macro,** press and hold the **Edit** button and then select the macro.


**To copy and existing macro to a new macro,** press and hold **Copy** to copy the source macro. Then, tap or press
the control where you would like to paste the macro assignment.


**To delete an existing macro,** press and hold **Delete** and tap or press the macro control.


366

---

## Page 367

**Knobs**


In the **Knobs** tab, you can learn any automation parameter from within
your project to Force's knobs, each with their own range and polarity.


**To enter Knobs mode,** do either of the following:


  - In Macros Mode, tap the **Knobs** button at the bottom of the
screen.


  - Press and hold **Edit** and then tap a knob.


Use the **Modes** field at the top left of the touchscreen to select the Knobs
mode to edit. The following modes in this tab are not editable as macros,
but you can view their current assignments on this page: **Volume**, **Pan**,
**Send 1** - **4**, **MIDI** and **Screen** .


In addition to these modes, the following modes can be used to assign
parameters to the knobs as macros: **Project 1** - **2**, **Track** and **Track FX**
**Rack** .


**Crossfader**


In the Crossfader tab, you can learn any automation parameter from
within your project to Force's Crossfader.


**To enter Crossfader mode,** do either of the following:


  - In Macros Mode, tap the **Crossfader** button at the bottom of
the screen.


  - Press and hold **Edit** and then press **Assign A** or **Assign B** .


There are 16 available crossfader scenes, which can be selected using
the **Mode** field at the top left of the screen. Each scene can be assigned
to one or more parameters.


**To change crossfader scenes directly from the hardware,** press
and hold **Assign A** and then press **Assign B** to move to the next
scene. To move to the previous scene, press and hold **Assign B**
and then press **Assign A** .


**To learn a parameter to the crossfader:**


1. Make sure Force is not currently in playback.


2. Select the parameter you would like to assign to the crossfader using the directions _**above**_ . For example, let's learn a
synthesizer parameter. Select a plugin track, and then open Track Edit mode to view the plugin parameters.


3. Hold down either the **Assign A** or **Assign B** buttons on Force, and then move any parameter on the touchscreen.
When holding **Assign A**, the parameter will be assigned to the crossfader with the minimum value to the left side and
the maximum value to the right side. When holding **Assign B**, the parameter will be reversed with the maximum value
on the left side and the minimum value on the right side.


367

---

## Page 368

**XY Pad**


In the **XY Pad** tab, you can learn any automation parameter from within
your project to one of four assignable XY Pads.


**To cycle between the four available XY Pad assignments,** tap
the **XY Pad** tab.


Use the **Mode** field at the top left of the touchscreen to select the part
of the XY Pad that you would like to assign parameters to. This
functions like a collection of different macros, allowing you to assign
parameters to the X-Axis, Y-Axis, Columns 1–8, Rows 1–8, or even
different to the axes of the Quadrants in the XY Pad.


Use the **Full Screen** button to make the current XY Pad fill the entire
screen.


**Pad Grid**


In the **Pad Grid** tab, you can learn any automation parameter from
within your project to Force's pad matrix. Assigning automation
parameters to the pads gives you a more performative way of
controlling effects and mixer parameters. For example, you can assign
a pad to mute a group of tracks, or to toggle insert effects on and off.


Use the **Mode** field at the top left of the touchscreen to select the pad
**Bank** to assign parameters to.


Use the **Full Screen** button to make the current pad **Bank** fill the entire
screen.


**To access the Pad Grid macros directly from the hardware, do any of the following:**


  - Press and hold the **Knobs** button, and then press the **Launch/Config** button to split the pad matrix between
launching clips and triggering the Pad Grid macros.


  - Press and hold the **Knobs** button, and then press the **Notes/Config** button to split the pad matrix between playing
notes and triggering the Pad Grid macros.


  - Press and hold the **Knobs** button, and then press the **Launch/Config** and **Notes/Config** buttons at the same
time to split the pad matrix between launching clips in the top quadrants and playing notes and triggering the Pad
Grid macros in the bottom quadrants.


When the Pad Grid macros are active in the pad matrix, you can use the **Edit** buttons to edit, copy and delete macros
from these controls directly from the hardware.


368

---

## Page 369

**Envelope Follower**


In the **Env Follower** tab, you can use an audio signal (such as a kick
drum) as a control signal to create side-chain or modulation effects.


There are 16 available envelope followers, which can be selected using
the **Mode** field at the top left of the touchscreen.


Tap the **On** button to enable or disable the envelope.


Use the **Envelope Source** field to select the audio signal that will be
used as the control signal for the envelope. This can be audio from a
track, or, if you choose a Drum track, audio from a specific pad. You
can also select the **Returns**, **Submixes**, and **Main Output** tracks, as
well as dedicated **LFO** (low frequency oscillator) shapes.


After selecting the Envelope Source, you can use the additional fields on the left side of the touchscreen to configure the
envelope parameters. The available parameters when a track, pad or keygroup is selected as the Envelope Source are as
follows:


Use the selector below the Envelope Source field to set where the envelope is applied:


    - **Input:** The envelope is applied at the audio input source. This option is not available for individual Pads or
Keygroups.


    - **Pre-Inserts:** The envelope is applied before any insert effects.


    - **Post-Fader:** The envelope is applied at the end of the channel strip after any insert effects and after the set
volume level.


    - **Playback:** The envelope is applied on playback of the selected track. This option is only available for MIDI
and CV tracks.


Use the knobs below the envelope selector to adjust the parameters of the envelope. Tap the arrows to move between
the pages of parameters when applicable.


    - **Gain (%)** adjust the amount of gain applied to the envelope.


    - **Delay (ms)** adjusts the amount of delay in milliseconds after which the envelope is triggered.


    - **Gate (%)** adjusts the amount of gate applied to the envelope.


    - **Hyst (%)** adjusts the level at which the gate closes after opening.


    - **Attack** adjusts the amount of attack for the envelope gate. This can also be adjusted by tapping and dragging
the **A** handle in the envelope display.


    - **Decay** adjusts the amount of decay for the envelope gate. This can also be adjusted by tapping and dragging
the **D** handle in the envelope display.


When **LFO** is selected as the Envelope Source, the available parameters are as follows:


Use the selector to configure how the LFO is applied to the envelope. Select **Free-Running** for the LFO to continue
even when not triggered, or select **Reset On Play** for the LFO to revert to its starting configuration when triggered.


Use the knobs below the selector to adjust the parameters of the LFO:


    - **Freq (Hz)** adjusts the frequency, in Hertz, of the LFO.


    - **Phase (º)** adjust the starting phase of the LFO.


    - **Level (%)** adjusts the amount of LFO applied.


When the LFO envelope is engaged, you will see a representation of the LFO signal.


Once you have configured the envelope follower source, use the right side of the screen to select the parameter(s) that it
will modulate using the same directions as _**above**_ .


369

---

## Page 370

**Project Pull-Down Menu**

You can now easily access key Force project parameters in any mode by using the project pull-down menu.


**To open the project pull-down menu,** tap and drag from the middle-top of the screen. The menu can be set to two
sizes depending on how far down you drag your finger.


**To close the menu,** simply swipe it back upwards to the top of the screen.


The project pull-down menu contains the following controls when
pulled partway down:


Tap the **Global Automation** button to toggle between **Read** and
**Write** . To disable global automation entirely, hold **Shift** and tap this
button.


Tap the **Loop** button to toggle the arrangement loop on or off.


Use the **Momentary** button to set the behavior of a macro control.
See _**Macro Controls**_ for more information.


Use the **Learn** button to learn a parameter to a macro control. See
_**Macro Controls**_ for more information,


When the project pull-down menu is fully opened, the following
additional controls are available:


Tap the **Project** field to open the Project window, where you can
load and save projects.


Tap the **Bars:Beats:Ticks** field to open the Locate window.


Tap the **BPM** field to open the **Tempo** window, where you can
adjust the tempo of the project.


The **Memory** and **CPU** meters monitor Force's system resources.


Tap the **I/O** icons to open the MIDI monitor.


Tap the **Retrospective Record** button to capture recently played
MIDI input and add it to the selected clip or arrangement.


Tap the **Time Division** button to open the **Timing Correct** window.


Tap the **MIDI Rec Erase** button to enable or disable MIDI record
erasing in Arrange Mode. When enabled, recording MIDI events will
replace any existing events in the arrangement. When disabled,
recording MIDI events will overdub on any existing events in the
arrangement.


370

---

## Page 371

**16 Levels Drum Note Mode**


You can now use classic MPC-style 16 Levels control when using Note
mode with a Drum track. In 16 Levels Drum Note Mode, the bottom-left
quadrant of clip launch pads can be used like a traditional 4x4 drum
pad layout just like Drum Note Mode. The other three quadrants,
however, can be set to control a selectable parameter that is fixed at
values that increase as the pad numbers increase (e.g., Pad 1 is the
minimum, Pad 16 is the maximum), regardless of how hard you press
them.


**To enter 16 Level mode,** select a drum track and press **Note** until
**16 Level** appears on the screen.


While in 16 level mode, press and hold **Shift** and press the **Note/Config**
button to open the **Drum Note Configuration** window. In addition to
the standard Drum Note Configuration settings mentioned above, you
can use this to adjust what the 16 level quadrants control.


Use the **Top Left**, **Top Right**, and **Bottom Right** fields to set what
type of 16 Level control is used in each quadrant:

**Velocity** : The sample velocity increases from lowest (7) to
highest (127).

**Tune:** The sample tuning increases from the lowest pitch to
highest pitch. By default, the first pad in the quadrant is the
base pitch and the next 12 pads increase by one semitone
each. Use the **Transpose** field to transpose the original sample
down up to 12 semitones for increased range.

**Filter:** The cutoff value for the filter increases from lowest to highest. You can set the filter type for the pad in
Track Edit mode.

**Layer:** Each row of four pads covers a range of velocity from lowest to highest: 0-31, 32-64, 65-96 and 97-127.
Pads with multiple samples will play back each layer according to the **Velocity Start** and **Velocity End** settings
for each layer.

**Attack:** The attack envelope of the sample increases from lowest to highest.

**Decay:** The decay envelope of the sample increases from lowest to highest.


**Copy Pads**


You can now copy one or more pads from one drum track to another.
This process is available with other track editing processes in _**Grid**_ and
_**Clip**_ modes.


**To show the Copy Pads window,** tap the **pencil icon** in the
toolbar of Grid or Clip modes. After the **Grid Edit** window opens,
tap **Copy Pads** .

Use the **Copy Type** menu to select whether you want to copy
an individual **Pad**, a **Bank** of pads or a **Range** of pads. Use the
fields that appear to select the **Pad**, **From Bank** or **Start** / **End**
**Pads** that will be copied.

Use the **From Track** menu to select the track from which the
pads will be copied.

Use the **To Track** menu to select the track to which the copied
pads will be added.

Use the **Pad**, **To Bank** or **Start Pad** where the copied pads will
be added starting from.

Click **Apply** to confirm your setting, and then click **Do It** to copy
the pads or **Cancel** to return to the previous screen.


371

---

## Page 372

**Custom Progressions**


You can now create custom Progressions based on the current MIDI track from your Force. This process is available with
other clip editing processes.


**To show the Convert to Progression window,** tap the **pencil icon** in
the toolbar of **Grid** or **Clip Edit** Modes, and then tap **Convert to**
**Progression** . A melodic MIDI track must be selected.


Use the **Progression** fields to set the parameters of the new
Progression.

**To set the progression name,** use the **Name** field.

**To set the root note,** use the **Root Note** field.

**To set the scale type,** use the **Scale Type** field.


Use the **Chord** fields to set the parameters for the chords in your
progression.

**To select a chord from the progression to edit,** use the **Chord** field.

**To rename the selected chord,** use the **Name** field.

**To set the type of chord,** use the **Type** field to select **Root**, **Normal** or **Below Root** .

**To play the selected chord,** tap the **Play** button.


**To close the window and return to the previous screen,** tap the **X**, **Close** or anywhere outside the window.


**To perform with the progression on a track:**


1. Press the **Note** button to enter Notes mode for the pads.


2. Hold **Shift** and press **Note** again to open the **Note Config** window.


3. Set the **Type** to **Progressions** .


4. Use the **Progression** field to select your progression from the **Other** category.


**File Browser Improvements**


The Browser now features additional options for searching and sorting results.


Press the **Load** button to open the Browser, and then tap the **gear icon**
to open the Browser settings.


Check the **Show file size** box to include file size in the file details.


Check the **Show modified date** box to show the last date the file
was modified in the file details.


Check the **Show create date** box to show the date the file was
created in the file details.


Check the **Search includes subfolders** to enable recursive
searching. When this is enabled and a search term is entered, all
folders on the device will be searched.


Check the **Hide system folders** box to remove folders associated
with Force project files from appearing in the Browser.


You can also sort the search results by each column by tapping the column header. Tap the column header again to
change the direction of the results as shown by the **gray arrow** in the column.


372

---

## Page 373

Additionally, you can now load saved FX Racks from the Browser.


1. Select the track where you would like to load the FX rack.


2. Open the Browser.


3. Tap the Places tab on the right side of the screen, and then select **Force Documents > FX Racks** .


4. Select the FX Rack and tap Load. The associated plugins will be added to the Inserts of the selected track.


**Flatten Clip**


You can now flatten an audio clip, rendering all the edits and regions
within the clip bounds to a new audio clip in a single audio file:


1. First, make sure you have stopped transport playback.


2. Open Grid or Clip modes, and then tap the **pencil icon** in the
toolbar to open the Grid Edit window.


3. Select **Flatten Track** to **immediately** render all edits and regions
within the current track's arrangement to a new audio file.


Select **Flatten Track Elastique** to also **immediately** render all edits
and regions within the current track's arrangement to a new audio
file, but using the Elastique Pro algorithm for any time-stretching or
pitch-shifting, providing higher-quality results with less artifacts
than Force's standard algorithm.


**Import Ableton Live Projects**


You can now import Ableton Live projects into your Force.


**To import an Ableton Live project:**


1. Press the **Load** button to open the Browser.


2. Navigate to the file location of your Ableton Live projects.


3. Select the **.ALS** file for the project you want to import, and then tap **Load** .


**Note:** For an Ableton Live project to be successfully imported with all proper assets, you must use the **Collect All and**
**Save** option when saving your project in Ableton Live to collect all necessary project resources together.


When loading an Ableton Live project, Force will attempt to import the following information:


  - Launch Matrix Tracks/Clips to Tracks/Clips.


  - Arrangement View Sequence to Arrange tracks.


  - ALS Colors to Force Colors for pads.


  - Audio Clips to Audio Clips (with Looping points, names, warp, volume, pan, pitch adjustment).


  - MIDI Notes to MIDI Notes at 960 PPQ units, with looping points and names.


  - Basic conversion of ALS Drum Rack to XPJ Drum Kit. Only one “Selection” is handled. A maximum of four velocity
variations per instrument.


  - Basic conversion of ALS Impulse Instrument to XPJ Drum Kit.


  - Basic conversion of ALS Sampler to XPJ Keygroup. (128 keygroup limit). Only one “Selection” is handled.


  - Basic conversion of ALS Simpler to XPJ Keygroup.


  - Plugin instrument tracks are converted to Force MIDI tracks.


373

---

## Page 374

**Mixer / Pad Mixer Improvements**


In both the Mixer and Pad Mixer, the **Inserts & I/O** tab has been split into separate **Effects** and **I/O** tabs.


In the Effects tab, you can now add or edit an insert effect by tapping one of the four slots. The **Inserts** button above the
slots will open the traditional inserts overlay window.


You can also save and load FX Racks from a mixer strip. In the Effects tab, tap the **Inserts** button to open the insert
overlay. This window now contains three new icons to **Load Factory FX Rack**, **Load User FX Rack**, and **Save FX Rack** .


Alternatively, press the **Save** button and then tap **Track FX Racks** .


**Retrospective Record**


Your Force hardware now captures MIDI events in the background,
allowing you to recall performances when record was not enabled.


**To capture events using retrospective record,** select an empty
clip slot or the arrange event list, and then open the _**Project Pull-**_
_**Down Menu**_ by swiping down from the top of the screen. Tap
**Retrospective Record** to insert the recently played notes.


374

---

## Page 375

**Sample Edit Pad Controls**


You can now use the Force's pads to audition samples and create slices in _**Sample Edit Mode**_ .


**To enable Sample Edit Pad Mode,** tap the **pads icon** in the toolbar in Sample Edit Mode.


When in Trim Sample Edit Mode, the lower-left quadrant of pads can be used to audition certain parts of the selected
sample:


Play to Loop Play Loop
Play Loop [Play from Loop ]
Start Start Continuous


**13** **14** **15** **16**


Play Sample Play Sample
Play All No function
(One Shot) (Note On)


**09** **10** **11** **12**


Play from Start Play to Start Play to End Play from End
(Note On) (Note On) (Note On) (Note On)


**05** **06** **07** **08**


Play from Start Play to Start Play to End Play from End
(One Shot) (One Shot) (One Shot) (One Shot)


**01** **02** **03** **04**


**Play Sample** ( **One Shot** ) ( **Pad 10** ) plays the sample once from the start point to the end point. Press the pad once to
play it.


**Play Sample** ( **Note On** ) ( **Pad 11** ) plays the sample once from the start point to the end point. Press and hold the pad
to play it, and release the pad to stop playing it. Alternatively, select the **headphones icon** in the upper-right corner,
and then tap and hold your finger on the waveform.


**Play Loop Continuous** ( **Pad 16** ) plays the sample repeatedly using the mode set by the **Loop** button ( **Forward**,
**Reverse**, or **Alternating** ; if the **Loop** button is **off**, the sample will loop forward repeatedly).


**Play Loop** ( **Pad 13** ) plays the sample repeatedly using the mode set by the **Loop** button ( **Forward**, **Reverse**, or
**Alternating** ; if the **Loop** button is off, the sample will loop forward repeatedly). Press and hold the pad to play it, and
release the pad to stop playing it.


**Play to Loop Start** ( **Pad 14** ) plays the part of the sample just before the loop point. Press and hold the pad to play it,
and release the pad to stop playing it.


**Play from Loop Start** ( **Pad 15** ) plays the sample from the loop point to the end of the sample regardless of the end
point. Press and hold the pad to play it, and release the pad to stop playing it.


**Play All** ( **Pad 9** ) plays the entire sample.


**Pads 1** - **4** have the same respective functions as **Pads 5** - **8**, but **Pads 1** - **4** play the sample part as “ **One Shots** ” (pressing
the pad once will play the entire part) while **Pads 5** - **8** play the sample part as “ **Note Ons** ” (pressing the pad and holding
it will play the part; releasing it will stop playback):


**Play from Start** ( **Pad 1**, **Pad 5** ) plays the sample from the start point to the end point.


**Play to Start** ( **Pad 2**, **Pad 6** ) plays the part of the sample just before the start point to the start point.


**Play to End** ( **Pad 3**, **Pad 7** ) plays the part of the sample just before the end point to the end point.


**Play from End** ( **Pad 4**, **Pad 8** ) plays the part of the sample from the end point to the end of the sample.


375
