# Force - User Guide - V3.3 (Pages 376-390)

> Converted from PDF using `pymupdf4llm`. Source: `/Users/ethan.stark/dev/misc/audio-midi/pdf/Force - User Guide - v3.3.pdf`.

---

## Page 376

When in Chop Sample Edit Mode, you can use the lower-left quadrant of pads to add slices to the current sample or
trigger existing slices.


When the current Track is a Drum Program and Pad Sample Edit Mode is selected, you can use the lower-left quadrant
of pads to audition the current sample of the current pad, similar to using Notes mode with a Drum Program.


**Single or Multi Record Arm**

You can now configure the behavior of the Record Arm buttons by adjusting the **Record Arm** setting under _**Preferences**_

_**> Sequencer**_ .


  - In **Single** mode, selecting a different track will automatically arm that track and disarm all other tracks. This is the
default mode and is the same as previous Force releases. To arm multiple tracks to record in Single mode, hold
**Shift** and tap each track's record button.


  - In **Multi** mode, you can tap any track's record button to add it to the group of armed tracks. This is useful when
doing multitrack recording.


**Workflow Enhancements**


You can now disable multiple Mute, Solo or Record Arm buttons by holding the **Delete** button and pressing one of the
**Assign Mode Buttons** .


You can now add the **Slice** parameter to automation for Drum and Keygroup tracks.


When the **Master** button is pressed, a notification now appears on screen temporarily to indicate whether the pads are
showing the Buses or project tracks.


The **track automation buttons** available in Mixer Mode now toggle between **Read** and **Write** states when tapped. To
turn automation off or on, hold **Shift** and tap the **track automation button** .


The **Timing Correct** (TC) window now has a convenient **Global Timing Correct On/Off** button.


You can now exclude a track from a scene launch. Double-tap the track header in Matrix mode to open the Track Settings
popup, and then select the **Row Launch** field. When this field is set to **Exclude from row launch**, the track's clips will
not launch when a scene is launched. This is useful when playing a full acapella track while triggering different clips
underneath.


In the **Arpeggiator** window, the **Time Division** field is now a radio selector, making it easier to use.


You can now merge samples and settings from two drums tracks together.


**To show the Merge Pads window,** tap the **pencil icon** in the toolbar of Grid or Clip modes. After the **Grid Edit**
window opens, tap **Merge Pads** .


Use the **From Track** menu to select the track from which the pads will be copied.


Use the **Into Track** menu to select the track to which the copied pads will be merged.


Check the **Start on next bank** box to merge the samples and settings at the start of the next unused bank.


Click **Do It** to merge the pads or **Cancel** to return to the previous screen.


376

---

## Page 377

You can now configure the brightness of the Force's pads. Go to _**Preferences**_ _>_ _**Hardware**_ and use the **Pad Brightness**
slider to adjust the intensity of the pads.


You can now select a single event or multiple events when using the Step Sequence pad mode.


1. Open Grid or Clip modes to view the Grid editor.


2. Press the **Step Seq** button to enter Step Sequence mode for the pad matrix.


3. Enter some note events into the sequence using the pads.


4. **To select step event,** press and hold **Clip Select** and tap one of the pads containing an event.


**To select multiple step events,** press and hold **Shift** and **Clip Select** at the same time, and then tap the pads
containing the events.


The MIDI Monitor now contains port names.


377

---

## Page 378

**Updates in Force 3.0.6**

**New Features**


**AIR DrumSynth**


The AIR DrumSynth plugins emulate the sound of classic drum
machines and feature multiple synthesis types, advanced
modeling and carefully crafted, built-in effects to create
powerful contemporary drum sounds.


**To use AIR DrumSynth:**


1. Press **Matrix** to enter Matrix Mode.


2. Press the **+ icon** at the top of the screen, or press and hold
a **Track Select** button to add a new track.


3. Tap **Plugin** to create a plugin track.


4. Double-tap the track header to open the **Track Settings**
window.


5. Double-tap the **Plugin** field. In the list that appears,
expand the **Force Drum Plugins** option and select the
desired option. You can add the following drum types as
individual plugins per track: **Clap**, **Crash**, **HiHat**, **Kick**,
**Perc**, **Ride**, **Snare** and **Tom** . Each of these instruments
has comprehensive synthesis and effects sections
described below.


In each plugin, you can quickly enable or disable the built-in effects ( **Transient**, **Distortion**, **EQ** and **Compressor** ) while
viewing any of the tabs listed below by tapping the buttons on the right side of the touchscreen under **FX** .


**Drum Sound**


Use this tab to adjust the basic settings for the drum sound. You can also use the knobs on this tab to quickly adjust
up to eight parameters specifically chosen for each sound.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**







378

---

## Page 379

**Trans/Dist**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the Transient and Distortion effects.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**


**EQ/Comp**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the EQ and Compressor effects.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**



379

---

## Page 380

You can also use the **DrumSynth:Multi** plugin to access all
DrumSynth sounds from one plugin, which includes additional
dedicated effects and mixing controls.


**Note:** You can only have one DrumSynth:Multi plugin active
per project.


**DrumSynth 1**  - **8** / **Trans/Dist** / **EQ/Comp**


Use the first eight tabs in the Multi to control the same
parameters as the individual DrumSynth plugins. Tap each
tab to cycle between the _**Drum Sound**_ view, the
_**Trans/Dist**_ view, and the _**EQ/Comp**_ view.


**Send FX**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the Delay, Diffuser and Reverb effects.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**















380

---

## Page 381

**Mixer / FX / Sends**


Use this tab to mix the individual drum sounds as well as control their effects. The **Mixer / FX / Sends** tab contains
three different views that can be accessed by tapping the tab at the bottom of the display.

Use the **Mixer** view to adjust the volume, panning, muting and soloing for each drum.


Tap the **1**   - **8** icons to mute or unmute the selected drum.


Tap the **S** icon to solo the selected drum.


Tap and drag the **pan slider** to adjust the drum panning. Alternatively, tap the slider and use the encoder, or use
the appropriate knob in Screen mode.


Tap and drag the **volume slider** to adjust the drum volume. Alternatively, tap the slider and use the encoder, or
use the appropriate knob in Screen mode.


Use the **FX** view to enable or disable the Transient, Distortion, EQ and Compressor effects for each drum sound.


Tap the **FX box** to enable or disable the selected FX on the selected drum.


Use the **Sends** view to adjust the send levels for the Delay, Diffuser and Reverb Send FX.


Tap and drag the **Send knob** to adjust the send level for the selected effect on the selected drum. Alternatively,
tap the knob and use the encoder, or use the appropriate knob in Screen mode.


381

---

## Page 382

**Updates in Force 3.1**

**New Features**


**Disk Streaming**


Audio files can now be streamed from disk instead of from memory.


**Note:** Disk streaming relies on the performance of the disk you are streaming from. For best operation, it is recommended
to use an SSD (solid-state drive) connected to Force’s internal SATA port. Once you have saved a project to your SSD,
your files will stream from that location. For an unsaved project, Force uses a temporary file location to stream audio files
from. Go to **Preferences > Project Load/Save** and set the **Temporary File Location** to your SSD for best results.


**To enable disk streaming:**


1. Press **Menu** to open the Menu, and then tap the **Preferences** to open the Preferences page.


2. Tap **Audio/Export**, and then check the **Enable Disk Streaming** box. Force will require a restart after disk streaming
is enabled.


Once enabled, a sample can be set to stream from disk or memory. By default, Drum and Keygroup samples are loaded
into memory, as this works better for on-demand, rapid triggering of multiple, simultaneous voices.


**To change a sample from streaming from memory to streaming from disk:**


1. Press **Menu** to open the menu, and then tap **Project** at the top of the touchscreen to open the Project window.


2. From here, you can now filter your sample pool to show samples that are in **Memory** or **Streaming** by tapping the
buttons at the top of the sample pool. Samples in **Memory** are shown with a white waveform next to their name.


3. To change a sample to stream from memory, tap and hold on the sample name until a menu appears. Tap **Stream**
**From Disk** to set the sample to disk streaming.


A sample’s streaming or memory state will be saved and recalled with your project.


**Note:** Using streamed samples with Drum and Keygroup tracks may cause performance issues when triggering multiple
samples or retriggering at high rates.


When using files streamed from disk, sample lists such as those in Sample Edit Mode or Track Edit Mode can now be
grouped by Memory or Streaming status.


If a project is too large to be loaded into memory, Force now loads the project and displays the missing samples in the
**Project** window with a waveform with a red minus icon. Once enough memory has been freed up, the missing samples
can then be loaded from the Project window. Tap and hold on the sample name and then select **Load To Memory** from
the menu that appears.


382

---

## Page 383

**AIR Mellotron, AIR Solina and WayOutWare Odyssey**


Your Force hardware now includes three new plugin instruments: _**AIR Mellotron**_, _**AIR Solina**_ and _**WayOutWare Odyssey**_ .


**To use the new plugins:**


1. Make sure you have downloaded the new Synth Content installation pack from your account at **[akaipro.com](http://akaipro.com)** .


2. Copy the **Synths** directory from the downloaded pack into the top-level folder of a SD card or USB drive. You do not
need to copy any of the other files. Then, insert the drive into your device.


**Note** : For maximum convenience, we recommend you install a SATA drive in the drive bay of your standalone Force
and then copy the **Synths** folder onto this drive.


**AIR Mellotron**

The AIR Mellotron plugin is a software recreation of the classic tape
keyboard, including reproductions of the original tape samples in both
clean and dirty versions.


**Model**


Use this tab to select a sound model and adjust its settings.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**


383

---

## Page 384

**AIR Mellotron** _(continued)_


**Flavor / Comp / EQ**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the flavor, compressor and EQ
effects. Each effect can be turned on and off by using the buttons on
the right side.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**


384

---

## Page 385

**AIR Mellotron** _(continued)_


**Delay / Spring**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the delay and spring reverb
effects. Each effect can be turned on and off by using the buttons on
the right side.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**















385

---

## Page 386

**AIR Solina**

The AIR Solina plugin is a software recreation of the classic string
synthesizer.


**Ensemble**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the synth voices.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**









386

---

## Page 387

**AIR Solina** _(continued)_


**Sound**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the synth voices.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**


**Flavor**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the flavor and vinyl effects.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**



387

---

## Page 388

**AIR Solina** _(continued)_


**Chorus / EQ**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the chorus and EQ effects. Use
the buttons on the right side to enable or disable each effect.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**


388

---

## Page 389

**AIR Solina** _(continued)_


**Delay / Spring Reverb**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the delay and spring reverb
effects. Use the buttons on the right side to enable or disable each
effect.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**









389

---

## Page 390

**WayOutWare Odyssey**

The WayOutWare Odyssey plugin is a software recreation of the classic
analog synthesizer that captures the character and nuance of the
original Odyssey using WayOutWare’s experience and expertise in
circuit modeling and signal processing.


**VCO 1 / 2**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the voltage-controlled oscillators.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**





















390
