# Force - User Guide - V3.3 (Pages 121-135)

> Converted from PDF using `pymupdf4llm`. Source: `/Users/ethan.stark/dev/misc/audio-midi/pdf/Force - User Guide - v3.3.pdf`.

---

## Page 121

**Trans/Dist**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the Transient and Distortion effects.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**


**EQ/Comp**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the EQ and Compressor effects.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**



121

---

## Page 122

You can also use the **DrumSynth:Multi** plugin to access all
DrumSynth sounds from one plugin, which includes additional
dedicated effects and mixing controls.


**Note:** You can only have one DrumSynth:Multi plugin active
per project.


**DrumSynth 1**  - **8** / **Trans/Dist** / **EQ/Comp**


Use the first eight tabs in the Multi to control the same
parameters as the individual DrumSynth plugins. Tap each
tab to cycle between the _**Drum Sound**_ view, the
_**Trans/Dist**_ view, and the _**EQ/Comp**_ view.


**Send FX**


Use this tab to adjust the settings for the Delay, Diffuser and Reverb effects.


**Parameter** **Description** **Value Range**















122

---

## Page 123

**Mixer / FX / Sends**


Use this tab to mix the individual drum sounds as well as control their effects. The **Mixer / FX / Sends** tab contains
three different views that can be accessed by tapping the tab at the bottom of the display.

Use the **Mixer** view to adjust the volume, panning, muting and soloing for each drum.
Tap the **1**     - **8** icons to mute or unmute the selected drum.


Tap the **S** icon to solo the selected drum.


Tap and drag the **pan slider** to adjust the drum panning. Alternatively, tap the slider and use the encoder, or use
the appropriate knob in Screen mode.


Tap and drag the **volume slider** to adjust the drum volume. Alternatively, tap the slider and use the encoder, or
use the appropriate knob in Screen mode.


Use the **FX** view to enable or disable the Transient, Distortion, EQ and Compressor effects for each drum sound.


Tap the **FX box** to enable or disable the selected FX on the selected drum.


Use the **Sends** view to adjust the send levels for the Delay, Diffuser and Reverb Send FX.


Tap and drag the **Send knob** to adjust the send level for the selected effect on the selected drum. Alternatively,
tap the knob and use the encoder, or use the appropriate knob in Screen mode.


**Mellotron**


See _**Addenda**_ _>_ _**Updates in Force 3.1**_ _>_ _**New Features**_ _>_ _**AIR Mellotron, AIR Solina, WayOutWare Odyssey**_ for more
information on this plugin.


**Solina**


See _**Addenda**_ _>_ _**Updates in Force 3.1**_ _>_ _**New Features**_ _>_ _**AIR Mellotron, AIR Solina, WayOutWare Odyssey**_ for more
information on this plugin.


**WayOutWare Odyssey**


See _**Addenda**_ _>_ _**Updates in Force 3.1**_ _>_ _**New Features**_ _>_ _**AIR Mellotron, AIR Solina, WayOutWare Odyssey**_ for more
information on this plugin.


**MPC Instrument Collection**


Force now supports the MPC Instrument Collection of additional instrument plugins. See _**Addenda**_ _>_ _**Updates in Force**_
_**3.2**_ _>_ _**New Features**_ _>_ _**MPC Instrument Collection**_ for more information on these plugins.


123

---

## Page 124

**Standalone vs. Computer Mode**


Force can function in two ways: **Standalone Mode** and **Computer Mode** . By default, Force will power on in Standalone
Mode.


In Standalone Mode:


  - The Force hardware will **not** communicate with a computer over a USB connection.


  - Any files (projects, samples, etc.) that you save or load are in the internal hard drive on your Force or a connected
USB drive or SD card.


In Computer Mode:


  - Force will communicate with a computer over USB connection.


  - Force can be used as an audio interface.


**Note:** Full Computer Mode support will be available in a forthcoming firmware update.


**To enter Computer Mode:**


1. Make sure the **USB-B Port** on Force is connected to your computer.


2. If Force is powered off, press the **power button** to turn it on.


3. With Force in Standalone Mode, press **Menu** to open the Menu, and then tap the **computer icon** in the upper-right
corner.


4. When the **Enter Computer Mode** window appears, tap **Computer Mode** to continue. (If you tap **Cancel**, you can
continue using Force in standalone mode.) **Looking for computer** may appear briefly on the display before your
computer recognizes the USB connection as a controller.


While in Computer Mode, the display will show **Computer Mode** with a monitor icon and a button to return to
Standalone Mode.


**To return to Standalone Mode:**


1. If Force is powered off, press the **power button** to turn it on.


2. With Force in Computer Mode, press **Standalone** .


3. A confirmation window will appear. Make sure that you have safely ejected all drives connected to Force, and then
tap **Yes** to continue. (If you tap **Cancel**, you can continue using Force in computer mode.)


4. Force will restart into Standalone Mode.


124

---

## Page 125

**Modes**


The Force hardware has a Menu page that lets you select any one of several modes. This chapter describes the various
features and functions of each one.


Click a button below to skip directly to that chapter.


125

---

## Page 126

**Clip Matrix Mode**


Clip Matrix Mode gives you an overview of your tracks and clips.


**To enter Clip Matrix Mode**, do one of the following:


  - Press **Matrix** .


  - Press **Menu**, and then tap **Clip** **Matrix** .


**To create a new clip,** double-tap an empty clip slot. Alternatively, tap and hold on an empty clip slot, and then tap **Create** .


**To launch a clip,** tap an existing clip.


**To launch a scene,** tap the scene launch icons on the far right of the display.


**To add a new track**, tap the **+** icon at the top of the display. If your project already has 8 tracks, move the Matrix view to
the right to show this icon.


**To insert a new scene or clear a scene,** hold **Edit** and press a **Scene**
**Launch** button to open the **Edit Row** window.


Tap **Insert** to insert one new scene row.


Tap **Insert 8** to insert 8 new scene rows.


Tap **Insert & Capture** to capture any clips currently playing in other
scenes and add it to the new scene.


Tap **Clear** to clear the currently selected scene.


Tap **Snapshot** to take a snapshot of all automation parameters in each row using the Row Launch buttons. Once a
snapshot has been captured to a row, the saved state of all automation settings will be relaunched with the event
data on that row. **To clear a snapshot from a row,** tap **Clear Snapshot** from the Edit Row window.


**To edit track settings,** double-tap the track name at the top of the display. See _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Tracks**_ for more
information on editing track settings.


**To edit clip settings,** hold **Edit** and press a clip launch pad.


Use the **Name** field to rename the clip. Tap it and use the virtual
keyboard that appears.


Use the **Color** field to set the clip color.


Use the **Launch Quantization** field to set the quantization amount
for launching the clip.


Use the **Launch Mode** field to set the clip launch behavior. Select
**Toggle** for the clip to start or stop with each successive press.
Select **Trigger** for the clip to start at the beginning with each press.


**To move the current matrix display view,** use the **cursors** . To move the display by eight rows or columns at a time,
hold **Shift** and use the **cursors** .


126

---

## Page 127

**To show or hide the Arrangement row in the matrix,** press and hold **Shift** and press the **Launch/Config** button to open
the Launch Configuration window, and then check or uncheck the **Show arrangement in clip matrix** box.


You can also tap and hold your finger on a clip slot to quickly access some of the functions above.


For clip slots with clips in them, you can select **Copy**, **Delete**, **Edit Clip** (brings you to Clip View in Clip Edit Mode),
**Edit Event** / **Edit Region** (brings you to Event View or Region View in Clip Edit Mode) and **Settings** (opens the Clip
Settings Window).


For empty clip slots, you can **Create** a new clip or **Paste** a copied clip.


**To view the Returns and Output tracks,** press **Master** . You can create and launch clips for automation on these tracks
using the same methods as above. See _**Addenda > Updates in Force 3.1**_ _>_ _**New Features**_ _>_ _**Bus Automation**_ for more
information.


The clips in Clip Matrix Mode will change appearance based on their current status:














|Col1|Stopped, playback stopped|Col3|Prepared to record|
|---|---|---|---|
|<br>|Stopped, playback active<br>|<br>|Recording<br>|
|<br>(flashing)|Prepared to play<br>||Overdubbing|
|<br>|Playing<br>|<br>|Exiting recording<br>|
|<br>(flashing)|Prepared to stop<br>|||



**To open the Project Configuration window**, tap the upper left corner
of the display where the BPM and Key are located. You can then do
any of the following:


Use the **Tempo** field to set the project tempo. Use the **data dial** or
**-/+** buttons to change the tempo, or double-tap the field to open
the number pad. Alternatively, use the **tap tempo** button to set the
tempo.


Use the **Note** and **Scale** fields to set the project key information.


Use the **Launch Quantization** field to set the global quantization
amount for launching all clips.


Tap **Close**, the **X** or outside the window to close the Project
Configuration window and return to Clip Matrix Mode.



127

---

## Page 128

**To open the Record Configuration window,** press and hold **Record**,
and then tap **Settings** .


Check the **Write automation when recording** box to capture
automation while recording.


Use the **Record Launch** field to set how recording is initiated.
When set to **Pad**, tap any pad while the track is armed to begin
recording. When set to **Pad and REC Button**, tap any pad while
the track is armed to begin recording, or press the **Record** button
to begin recording on the highlighted clip slot. When set to **REC**
**Button then Pad**, first press the record button, then tap any pad to
begin recording. This is the default mode when Force is powered
on.


Use the **Clip** **Record To** field to set the behavior when recording is
completed, entering either **Overdub** or **Play** .


Use the **Record Arm** field to set the arming behavior of the **Rec**
**Arm** button. When set to **Single**, Force automatically record arms
the current track when changing tracks and disarms any others.
When set to **Multi**, Force can record arm multiple tracks at the
same time.


When using Single Record Arm, it is still possible to record arm
multiple tracks. To do so, press and hold the **Select** button and
then press the **Track Assign** buttons for the tracks you want to
arm.


Check the **Fixed Length Recording** box to stop recording after the
clip length set in the **Fixed Length (Bars)** field. Leave unchecked
to record for any desired clip length.


Tap **Close**, the **X** or outside the window to close the Record
Configuration window and return to Clip Matrix Mode.


128

---

## Page 129

**Navigate Mode**


Navigate Mode lets you quickly select which 8x8 grouping of clips is currently in focus for the **clip launch pads**
and Clip Matrix Mode.


**To enter Navigate Mode,** do one of the following:


  - Press **Navigate** .


  - Press **Menu**, and then tap **Navigate** .


**To move the matrix view,** do any of the following:


Use the **cursors** to move the view one row or column at a time. You can also hold **Shift** and use the cursors to move eight
rows or columns at a time.


Use your finger to tap or drag to the desired location.


129

---

## Page 130

**Mixer**


In the Mixer, you can set levels, stereo panning, and other settings for your tracks, submixes, returns and main
outputs.


**To open the Mixer,** do either of the following:


  - Press **Menu**, and then tap **Mixer** .


  - Press **Mixer** .


The Mixer works like an audio mixer with various settings for each track, with up to 8 tracks shown on the display at once.
The name of the track is displayed at the top of each one.

**To select a track**, tap it or press one of the **track select** buttons.


**To view more tracks,** use the left or right **cursors** . Alternatively, drag your finger left or right on the display.


**To view the Submixes,** quickly swipe your finger to the left on the display.


**To view the Return and Main Output tracks,** press the **Master** track select button. Alternatively, quickly swipe your
finger to the left on the display until the Returns and Main Output tracks are shown.


**To open the Mixer configuration,** tap the **Settings** icon in the lower-right corner of the screen to edit the Mixer
configuration.


Use the **Solo Button** field to set the behavior of the solo buttons. They can be used to either **Solo Tracks** or **Cue**
**Tracks** .


Use the **Crossfader** field to set the **Profile** of the crossfader, either **Linear**, **Exponential** or **Logarithmic** .


130

---

## Page 131

**Volume**


The **Volume** tab gives you an overview of the volume level of your tracks.


Tap a **level slider** and then use the **data dial** or **–** / **+** buttons to adjust the volume level of the currently selected track,
return or main output. Alternatively, tap and drag a **level slider** to adjust the volume level.


The level sliders and meters in each pad show a visual representation of the level. Double-tap a **track** on the screen
to open a large version of the level slider and meter.


**Pan & Volume**


The **Pan & Volume** tab gives you a number of mixing options for your tracks.


Use the **M** and **S** buttons to mute and solo the track. When **Cue Tracks** is enabled, the **S** button will become a
**Headphones** button.


Use the **automation button** to set the automation status of the track. See _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Automation**_ for more
information on automation.


Use the **record button** to arm the track for recording.


The **pan sliders** in each track show a visual representation of the pan. Tap a pan slider and then use the **data dial** or

**–** / **+** buttons to adjust the panning of the currently selected track, return or main output. Double-tap a pan slider on
the screen to open a large version of the slider.


Tap a **level slider** and then use the **data dial** or **–** / **+** buttons to adjust the volume of the currently selected track, return
or main output. Double-tap a level slider on the screen to open a large version of the slider. Alternatively, tap and drag
a **level slider** to adjust the volume level.


Tap the **A** or **B** icons to assign the track to the crossfader A or B grouping.


131

---

## Page 132

**Sends**


The **Sends** tab gives you an overview of the **Sends 1** - **4** level of your tracks.


Use the **M** and **S** buttons to mute and solo the track. When **Cue Tracks** is enabled, the **S** button will become a
**Headphones** button.


Use the **automation button** to set the automation status of the track. See _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Automation**_ for more
information on automation.


Use the **record button** to arm the track for recording.


Use the **send knobs** to adjust the send level of tracks. Tap the knob and use the **data dial** or **–** / **+** buttons to adjust
the level.


**To learn how to use send effects**, please see _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Effects**_ _>_ _**Send**_ _/_ _**Return Effects**_ .


**Important** : When using send channels, make sure you have already loaded at least one effect to it using the return
mixer. Press the **Master** button to view the Return channels and then select the **Effects** tab, described _**below**_ .


132

---

## Page 133

**Effects**


The **Effects** tab lets you view and edit insert effects for your tracks.


Use the **M** and **S** buttons to mute and solo the track. When **Cue Tracks** is enabled, the **S** button will become a
**Headphones** button.


Use the **automation button** to set the automation status of the track. See _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Automation**_ for more
information on automation.


Use the **record button** to arm the track for recording.


Tap the **Inserts** button to open the Inserts window.


Use the four **insert** fields to add insert effects to the track. Empty insert slots will show a **+** icon. Inserts with a loaded
effect will show the name of the effect.


**To learn how to use insert effects**, please see _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Effects**_ _>_ _**Insert Effects**_ .


Tap the **A** or **B** icons to assign the track to the crossfader A or B grouping.


Press the **Master** button while viewing the Effects tab to view the Return and Output Insert effects slots.


133

---

## Page 134

**I/O**


The **I/O** tab lets you view and edit audio and MIDI routing for your tracks.


Use the **M** and **S** buttons to mute and solo the track. When **Cue Tracks** is enabled, the **S** button will become a
**Headphones** button.

Use the **automation button** to set the automation status of the track. See _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Automation**_ for more
information on automation.

Use the **record button** to arm the track for recording.

Tap the **Monitor** button to set the monitoring behavior.

For Audio tracks:

**Off:** The track's audio input is not monitored.

**In:** The track's audio input is monitored whether the track is record-enabled or not.

**Auto:** The track's audio input is monitored while the track is record-enabled only.

For MIDI tracks:

**Off:** The track's MIDI input is not monitored, and playback of recorded events will be heard. This setting is
useful when using keyboards with Local Control active.

**In:** The track's MIDI input is always monitored regardless of the track's Record Arm state, and playback from
recorded events will not be heard.

**Auto:** The track's MIDI input is monitored when the track is record armed, and playback of recorded events
will be heard.

**Merge:** The track's MIDI input is always monitored, and playback of recorded events will be heard.

Use the **Input** fields to select the input routing for the track.

For Audio tracks:

Use the **Audio In** field to configure the input source of the external audio signal, which you can set to a pair
of inputs (Input 1,2) or a single input (Input 1, Input 2).

For MIDI tracks:

Use the **MIDI Input** and **Channel** fields to configure the MIDI input settings.

Use the **Send To** field to send the track's MIDI output to another track.

Use the **Output** field to set the output routing for the track.

For Audio tracks:

Use the **Audio Out** field to configure where the track is routed, which you can set to a submix (Sub 1–8), a
pair of outputs (Out 1,2–Out 3,4), or a single output (Out 1–4).

For MIDI tracks:

Use the **MIDI Output** and **Channel** fields to configure the MIDI output settings.


134

---

## Page 135

**Pad Mixer**


In the Pad Mixer, you can set levels, stereo panning, and other settings for individual pads. This mode is only
available for Drum and Keygroup tracks.


To open the Pad Mixer, do either of the following:


  - Press **Menu**, and then tap **Pad** **Mixer** .


  - Press and hold **Shift** and press **Mixer** .


Just like the track Mixer, the Pad Mixer works like an audio mixer with various settings for each pad, with up to 8 pads
shown on the display at once. The name of the pad is displayed at the top of each one.


**To select a pad**, tap it or press the respective **clip select** button in **Note** mode.


**To view more pads,** drag your finger left and right on the display.


**To open the Pad Mixer configuration,** tap the **Settings** icon in the lower-right corner of the screen to edit the Pad Mixer
configuration.


Check the **Filter by events** box to show only pads with events.


Check the **Filter by samples** box to show only pads with samples assigned.


Check the **Write automation when recording** box to set automation to always write when recording.


135
