# Force - User Guide - V3.3 (Pages 196-210)

> Converted from PDF using `pymupdf4llm`. Source: `/Users/ethan.stark/dev/misc/audio-midi/pdf/Force - User Guide - v3.3.pdf`.

---

## Page 196

**LFO**


A low-frequency oscillator (LFO) generates a periodic waveform with an adjustable frequency and shape which can be
used for modulation purposes.


Use the **Wave** field to select the LFO waveform type:


  - **Sine** (best suited for smooth modulations)


  - **Triangle** (best suited for smooth modulations)


  - **S&H** (samples a random value and holds it until the next value is generated)


  - **Saw** (can generate interesting filter or volume changes)


  - **Saw Down** (can generate interesting filter or volume changes)


  - **Square** (interesting results with hard-panning modulations)


  - **Noise** (generates random values and glides)


Use the **Rate** field to determine the LFO frequency. At lower values, it might take some time for the LFO to complete a
cycle, while higher values will come closer to audible range.


Use the **Sync** field to set if the LFO’s rate is synchronized with the tempo. You can select one of several time divisions
(a **.** indicates a dotted note; a **T** indicates a triplet-based time division). When **None** is selected, **Sync** is off.


Use the **Destinations** sliders to determine how much the LFO affects the pitch of the sound ( **Pitch** ), the cutoff frequency
of the filter ( **Filter** ), the volume level of the sound ( **Amp** ) and panning of the sound ( **Pan** ).


196

---

## Page 197

**Modulations**


Use the **Velocity Sensitivity** sliders to set how much velocity is required to modulate certain other parameters:


  - **Sample Start** sets how much velocity is needed (for a triggered pad) to modulate the sample start point.


  - **Filter Cutoff** uses the velocity of a pad to modulate the cutoff frequency directly.


  - **Filter Env Attack** sets how much velocity is needed (for a triggered pad) to modulate the Attack phase for the
Filter envelope.


  - **Filter Env Depth** enables velocity information to control the amount of the filter envelope’s effect on the cutoff
frequency.


  - **Pitch** uses the velocity of a pad to modulate the sample pitch.


  - **Amp** uses the velocity of a pad to change the sample level. Lower this value to reduce the effect of velocity on
the amplitude.


  - **Amp Attack** sets how much velocity is needed (for a triggered pad) to modulate the Attack phase for the Amp
envelope.


  - **Pan** uses the velocity of a pad to control the stereo panning.


Use the **LFO** **Destinations** sliders to determine how much the LFO affects the pitch of the sound ( **Pitch** ), the cutoff
frequency of the filter ( **Filter** ), the volume level of the sound ( **Amp** ) and panning of the sound ( **Pan** ).


197

---

## Page 198

**Effects**


Tap **Effects** to cycle through its two available tabs.


**Inserts**


In the first Effects tab, you can select up to four insert effects for each pad. To learn how to use insert effects, please see
_**General Features**_ _>_ _**Effects**_ _>_ _**Insert Effects**_ .


**To add an effect** :


1. Double-tap the desired **Inserts** slot. A list of effects will appear.


2. Swipe up or down to move through the list.


You can tap the **Type** and **Manufacturer** buttons to sort your effects by those categories.


3. **To load an effect, double-tap it**, or tap **Select** .


**To close the list**, tap **Close** .


**To rearrange an insert effect,** tap the arrows next to the insert slot to move the selected effect up or down.


**To remove an effect from its slot**, tap the **trash can icon** .


**To enable or disable the effect**, tap the **On** / **Off** button for the slot.


**To enable or disable all four insert effects**, tap the **All** **On** / **Off** button in the upper-right corner.


**To load a factory FX rack,** tap the **Akai folder** icon. You can choose from a number of preset combinations of insert
effects by applications like Drums and Percussion, Voice, LoFi, Mastering, and more.


**To load a saved FX rack,** tap second **folder** icon.


**To save an FX rack,** tap the **disk** icon.


198

---

## Page 199

**To adjust the effect’s parameters**, tap the **pencil icon** . Use the controls to set the value of each parameter. These values
affect only this instance of the effect; insert effects are not global.


**To load an effect preset,** tap the **folder** icon next to the preset name at the top of the display to open the file browser.


**To save a new effect preset,** tap the **disk** icon next to the insert selector at the top of the display.


**Sends**


The audio of the pad will be routed to send effects (if you have any loaded) at their designated send levels. The return
channels will then send the audio to an assigned main output at the designated return levels.


Use the **Send** knobs to set the volume level of the signal the pad will route to each send effect.


**Important** : To learn about send effects, please see _**General Features**_ _>_ _**Effects**_ _>_ _**Send**_ _/_ _**Return Effects**_ .


**Drum FX**


The **Drum FX** tab lets you add and control up to eight effects per pad in a Drum track.


**To use the Drum FX:**


1. Load a Drum Track.


2. Press **Menu**, and then tap **Track Edit** to open Track Edit Mode.


3. Tap the **Effects** tab twice to open the second page.


4. There are eight available Drum FX slots, each with an adjustable
parameter:




- Ring Mod


- Bit Crush


- Decimator


- Tube Drive


- Soft Clipper


- Hard Clipper


- Low Pass


- High Pass




- Rectifier


- Bass Enhancer (Tight)


- Bass Enhancer (Medium)


- Bass Enhancer (Wide)


- Stereo Width


- Wave Folder


- Gain



5. Use the **Type** dropdown menu to select the effect in each slot and turn each knob to adjust the selected effect
parameter.


199

---

## Page 200

**Keygroup Tracks**


When using keygroup tracks, Track Edit Mode lets you edit the parameters for each keygroup.


**To select a keygroup**, press a **pad** within that keygroup. Its parameters will appear on the screen immediately.
Alternatively, use the **Keygroup** field at the top of the screen.


**To view a specific tab of parameters**, tap the **Global**, **Samples**, **Envelopes**, **LFO**, **Porta/Mod**, or **Effects** button at the
bottom of the screen. You can tap the **Samples**, **Envelopes**, or **Effects** buttons multiple times to cycle through the
available tabs.


**Number of KG** (keygroups) lets you create up to 128 keygroups within a keygroup track. This is useful when working with
multi-samples. For example, if you want to create a realistic piano, you can use different keygroups (e.g., 88 for a grand
piano) with every keygroup containing its own sampled note (with up to four possible velocity layers).


Tap the **Keygroup** field to select a keygroup to edit. You can also select **All** to edit all keygroups simultaneously.


Tap the **piano-keys icon** to edit the note range of the current keygroup.
This will open the **Set Keygroup Note Range** window. This lets you
restrict the key range used for a sample’s playback. Only notes with a
key number higher or equal ( **Low Key** ) or lower and equal ( **High Key** )
to the selected value will trigger a sound.


**Tips** :


Alternatively, you can set the current keygroup’s note range by using
the **Lo** and **Hi** fields under **Note** **Range** in the **Global** tab.


Set the **Lo** parameter to **A0** and the **Hi** parameter to **C8** to emulate the
range of a standard 88-key piano.


200

---

## Page 201

**Global**


In the Global tab, you can set the playback mode and tuning for the overall track.


**Global Semi** lets you tune the track up to 36 semitones up or down.


**Global Fine** provides fine-tuning of the track up to 99 cents up or down.


**Transpose** shifts the pitch of the MIDI notes sent to the track up to 36 semitones up or down.


**Poly** (polyphony) sets the playback mode for the track’s keygroups. In **Mono** Mode, only one keygroup will sound at a
time. If a keygroup is played while another (or the same one) is still playing its sample/samples, the new keygroup will
immediately mute all other currently playing keygroups in that track. In **Poly** Mode, several keygroups can be triggered at
the same time (limited only by the total number of voices available).


The **Key Group Semi** field lets you transpose the sample 36 semitones up or down, while **Fine** provides fine-tuning of
each layer up to 99 cents up or down.


**Tip** : The **Edit Layers** section has some parameters similar to those in this section ( **Level**, **Pan**, **Semi**, **Fine**, **Note Range** ).
Remember that **Key Group** parameters control the overall settings for the sample, while **Edit Layer** parameters control
the settings for each layer (up to 4).


**Level** controls the overall volume level of the loaded sample/samples.


**Pan** controls the overall panning of the loaded sample/samples in the stereo field.


201

---

## Page 202

The **Lo Key** and **Hi Key** fields let you restrict the key range used for a sample’s playback. Only notes with a key number
higher or equal ( **Lo** ) or lower and equal ( **Hi** ) to the selected value will trigger a sound. The settings for **Lo** and **Hi** are also
shown in the virtual keyboard in the **Edit Layers** section. Alternatively, tap the **piano-keys icon** to open the **Set Keygroup**
**Note Range** window.


**Tip** : Set the **Lo** parameter to **A0** and the **Hi** parameter to **C8** to emulate the range of a standard 88-key piano.


Use the **KG Polyphony** (keygroup polyphony) field to determine how the keygroup will play. When set to **Mono**, only one
pad will sound at a time. If a pad is played while another (or the same one) is still playing its sample/samples, the new pad
will immediately mute all other currently playing pads in that track. When set to **Poly**, several pads can be triggered at the
same time, limited only by the total number of voices available. You can also select a specific number of pads ( **2** - **32** ) so
that you can play up to this many pads at the same time (unless they exceed the total number of voices available).


Use the **Mute Group** field to assign the selected keygroup to one of the 32 available mute groups. When keygroups assigned
to the same mute group receive MIDI notes, the last keygroup played will silence all other keygroups in that mute group. A
mute group affects keygroups within that track only; mute groups do not affect keygroups in other tracks.


**Key Track** allows you to switch a sample’s automatic transposition on or off. If this is off, you will always hear the same
pitch of the sample, no matter which note is triggered by pads or a connected MIDI keyboard.


**Layer Play** determines how multiple samples assigned to the same pad are played:


  - **Cycle** ( **Cyc** ): Each time the pad is played, it will play the next layer’s sample. In other words, the samples will cycle
through the layers as follows: 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4… etc.


  - **Velocity** ( **Vel** ): The pad will switch between layers depending on how hard you press a pad.


  - **Random** ( **Ran** ): Each time the pad is played, it will play one of its layer’s samples at random.


**Sample Play** determines how much of the sample is played:


  - **One Shot** : The entire sample will play from start to end. Use this when you want to play short sounds.


  - **Note Off:** The entire sample will play from start to end after the pad has been pressed and released.


  - **Note On** : The sample will play only as long as the pad is held. This is better for longer samples so you can control
a sound’s duration by pressing and holding its corresponding pad.


202

---

## Page 203

**Samples**


Each keygroup can trigger up to four samples, which are assigned in four individual layers. Each layer has identical,
independently assignable parameters.


Tap **Samples** to cycle through its three available tabs.


On all three sections, you can access the **Settings** window, which lets you configure certain settings in the Samples tab.


**To view the Settings**, tap the **gear icon** .


**To close the Settings**, tap **Close**, the **X** in the upper-right corner, or anywhere outside the window.


Use the **Link Slices** selector to set how the start point and end point of a slice in a larger sample is set. You can create
these slices in Sample Edit Mode (Chop Mode).


When on, changing the start point of a slice will also change the end point of the previous slice. Similarly, changing the
end point of a slice will also change the start point of the next slice. Disable **Link Slices** if you are trying to create slices
that use non-contiguous parts of the sample. This is the same as the **Link Slices** button in Sample Edit Mode.


Use the **Loop Lock** selector to “link” or “unlink” the loop point from the start point. When on, the loop point is the same
as the start point. When off, the loop point is independent from the start point and indicated by a separate loop marker.
This is the same as the **Loop Lock** button in Sample Edit Mode.


Use the **Zero Snap** selector to enable or disable the Zero Snap feature, which forces start points, end points, and loop
points to occur only at the waveform’s “zero-crossings.” This can help to avoid clicks and glitches when playing a sample.
This is the same as the **0 Snap** button in Sample Edit Mode.


203

---

## Page 204

The **first Samples** tab contains the sample waveform for each layer and controls for its pitch, timing, and playback.


The upper half of the screen shows the waveform of the sample on the currently selected layer. The lower half shows the
editing controls.


The waveform display shows the “active” section of the clip waveform. Swipe left or right on the waveform to move
through it.


Above the waveform is the timeline, shown in bars, beats, and ticks.


Tap each layer number ( **Layer 1** - **4** ) under the waveform to select it. When selected, its sample waveform will be shown in
the upper half of the screen and its settings will be shown in the lower half.


Use the **Sample** field to select the sample file for that layer. Remember that the sample has to be loaded into the project’s
sample pool beforehand. For information on how to load samples into a project, please see the _**Browser**_ chapter.


**Important** : The parameters in the **Samples** tabs work in conjunction with Chop Mode (in Sample Edit Mode). Here’s how
it works:


When working in Sample Edit Mode and using Chop Mode to divide a sample into slices for your pads (keygroups), you
can convert a slice using **Non-Destructive Slice** or **Pad Parameters** .


A **Non-Destructive Slice** will let its keygroup to refer to that slice when you press a pad in that keygroup; the original
sample remains intact and each slice marker is like a “bookmark” for a keygroup. In Track Edit Mode, you’ll see that the
layer to which it’s assigned has its **Slice** drop-down menu set to the corresponding **slice number** in the original sample.
Playing that keygroup will cause it to refer to that slice marker like a “bookmark” instead of creating an entirely new sample
of that slice. This means that you no longer have to clutter your project with a new sample for every slice (though you can
still use this earlier method, if you prefer).


A slice converted using **Pad Parameters** is very similar to a non-destructive slice described above. The difference is that
in Track Edit Mode, the layers they’re assigned to have their **Slice** drop-down menus set to **Pad** (instead of the slice
number), and the **start** and **end points** will correspond to the slice markers in the original sample.


204

---

## Page 205

The **green** / **S** marker and **red** / **E** marker are the start point and end point (respectively). These two points define the region
of the sample that will be played.


**To move the start point or end point**, do any of the following:


  - Tap and drag the **S** or **E** marker left or right.


  - Use the **Start** or **End** fields shown below the waveform.


  - When the **knobs** are set to **screen** mode, use **Knobs 1** and **5** to adjust the start point or **Knobs 2** and **6** to adjust
the end point. Knobs 1 and 2 provide fine adjustment and Knobs 5 and 6 provide coarse adjustment.


**Note** : When **Loop Lock** is on, the loop position (as determined by the **Loop** field, if enabled) is the same as the sample’s
start point. When off, the loop position is independent from the start point.


Use the **Loop** field to determine the position where the sample’s playback will repeat when **Pad Loop** is activated.


**Note** : When **Loop Lock** is on, the loop position is the same as the sample’s start point. When off, the loop position is
independent from the start point.


Use the **Tail Length** and **Tail Loop** fields to add adding extra audio tail to any chopped sample. This is useful for things
like making an abrupt end to a sample sound more natural or adding experimental looping effects to a sample. The **Tail**
**Length** parameter enables the sample tail and set its total length, and the **Tail Loop** parameter sets the starting point
within the tail for looping.


Use the **Slice** field to select what part/parts of the sample will play:


  - **All** : The entire sample will play.


  - **Pad** : The sample will play from the **Pad Start** position to the **Pad End** position, described _**earlier**_ . This also lets
you activate _**Pad Loop**_ (if the **Sample Play** field in the **Global** tab is set to **Note On** ).


  - **Slice 1, 2, 3, etc.** : If you have sliced the sample in Chop Mode, you can select which slice will play when you
trigger the pad.


**Semi** lets you transpose the selected layer 36 up to semitones up or down. This is the same as the **Semi** knob on the
second **Samples** tab.


**Fine** provides fine-tuning of each layer by cents. This is the same as the **Fine** knob on the second **Samples** tab.


205

---

## Page 206

Use the **Reverse** button to select in which direction the sample will play. When on, the sample will play in reverse. When
off, the sample will play in the normal forward direction.


Use the **Pad Loop** button to cycle through the available Pad Loop modes.


**Important** : For Pad Loop to work, you must ( **1** ) set the **Sample Play** field (in the **Global** tab) to **Note On** instead of One
Shot and ( **2** ) set the **Slice** field (in the first **Samples** tab) to **Pad** instead of All or a slice number.


  - **Off** : The sample will not loop.


  - **Forward** : You can hold down the **pad** to cause that sample to repeat from the **Loop Position**
to the end of the sample. Release the **pad** to stop the repeating playback.


  - **Reverse** : You can hold down the **pad** to cause that sample to play in reverse, repeating from
the end of the sample to the **Loop Position** . Release the **pad** to stop the repeating playback.


  - **Alternating** : You can hold down the **pad** to cause that sample to play from the **Loop Position** to
the end of the sample and then play in reverse until it reaches the **Loop Position** again. This will
repeat as long as you are holding the pad down. Release the **pad** to stop the repeating playback.


206

---

## Page 207

The **second** **Samples** tab contains controls for its pitch, volume level, and panning.


**Semi** lets you transpose the selected layer 36 up to semitones up or down. This will affect the length of the sample (if
**Warp** is off). This is the same as the **Semi** field on the first Samples tab.


**Fine** provides fine-tuning of each layer by cents. This will affect the length of the sample (if **Warp** is off). This is the same
as the **Fine** field on the first Samples tab.


**Level** lets you adjust each layer’s volume, letting you control the “balance” of the samples assigned to the pad.


**Pan** lets you adjust the stereo placement of the respective layer.


207

---

## Page 208

The **third Samples** tab contains the control for its offset. velocity range and root note.


Use the **Offset** slider to determine a time offset for the sample’s playback.


  - **Positive values** (right of center): When the pad is played, playback will start immediately but at a later point in the
sample specified by the offset value.


  - **Negative values** (left of center): When the pad is played, playback will be delayed by the amount specified by the
offset value.


Use the **Vel Start** and **Vel End** knobs to define the velocity range of each layer.


A range from **0** to **127** lets the layer respond to the entire velocity range which is input from the respective pad while, for
example, a range from **100** to **127** lets the layer respond only to higher velocity levels. By assigning several samples of
one instrument, you can create a realistic-sounding “multi-sample” by adjusting the velocity ranges of each layer
accordingly.


For example, you may have three samples of a piano key with low force, medium force, and high force. You can set each
sample to a layer and set the Velocity ranges so only low velocities trigger the low-force sample, only mid-range velocities
trigger the medium-force sample, and only high velocities trigger the high-force sample.


Use the **Root Note** menu to set the starting note of each loaded sample. **Smp** denotes the sample’s default pitch.


208

---

## Page 209

The **fourth Samples** tab contains the controls for adding randomization to sample parameters such as pitch, level and
panning.


Use the **Pitch** knobs to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s pitch.


Use the **Level** knobs to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s volume.


Use the **Pan** knobs to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s stereo placement.


Use the **Offset** knobs to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s time offset.


The **All Layers** section will apply randomization to all sample layers for the following envelope parameters: **Attack**, **Decay**,
**Cutoff** and **Resonance** . Use the **Depth** slider to control the amount of envelope randomization applied overall.


209

---

## Page 210

**Envelopes**


Tap **Envelopes** to cycle through its three available tabs.


The **first** **Envelope** tab contains the amplitude modulation envelope.


**Keygroup Level** controls the overall volume level of the loaded sample/samples.


**Keygroup Pan** controls the overall panning of the loaded sample/samples in the stereo field.


The **Amp Envelope** controls affect level changes over time. Use the fields or tap and drag the “handles” of the envelope
to shape the envelope or time-variant modulation output. Adjust the envelope’s influence on the filter frequency with the
**Env** knob. See the later _**Anatomy of an Envelope**_ section to learn about the envelope parameters.


The **Velocity Modulation** controls determine how much the velocity affects the volume level of the amplitude envelope
( **Amp** ), the attack of the amplitude envelope ( **Amp** **Attack** ), and/or the panning of the sound ( **Pan** ).


When you press a pad softly, only minimal modulation is applied. When you press it harder, the modulation amount also
gets stronger depending on the setting of the corresponding slider.


210
