# Neuzeit Instruments DROP Manual v1.07 (Pages 31-45)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 31

MIDI CC & NRPN database
Drop ships with an open-source MIDI database* on board, which contains the MIDI mapping tables of many popular devices.
First, go to MENU > Devices > Database and scroll through the list to see if your hardware device is included. If you found it, select the file to assign
it to the device.
Then, enter MENU > Mapping, turn, push, move the control element to map and scroll to the Slot page. Now, when you select the device with the
newly assigned database file, the green Database  button is enabled. Push it to conveniently select the parameter you want to map from a list,
„
“
instead of looking up its parameters in the manual.
31
Select the target slot
where to apply the mapping to.
Name     If enabled, the name of the
whole control element will be set
according to the selected parameter.
It may happen though, that the
parameter s name is too long. Drop
’
crops it into a short name.

→edit    Edit the new short name
manually.
MIDI-feedb If set, the control
element s MIDI feedback selection will
’
be set to the newly assigned slot.
LED style
If set, when mapping a
rotary knob, the LED ring will be set to
Line from left or Line from center, based
on information the database entry.
Apply
Take over and fill the
MIDI parameters
with data
Back
Select another
parameter from the
database
MENU > Devices
Open the database and
look for your target device.
MENU > Mapping
Press the Database
button and select the
parameter you want to
assign.
* https://github.com/pencilresearch/midi


---

## Page 32

Copy and Move a control element
Once activated, control elements can me copied and moved within their own category. A fader can only
be copied to another fader, a rotary knob can only be moved to another rotary knob.
Move
Moves the whole control element with its mapping, also to another layer. Links to CV Out
and Mergers also move.
COPY
Copies the whole control element with its mapping, also to another layer.
Links to CV Out and Mergers stay at the original control.
32
   1: Push Copy or Move
2: Turn, push, move the target control element.


---

## Page 33

Snapshots
Snapshots are used to save and recall the state of rotary positions, buttons on-off status and fader positions.
A project contains 20 banks with 20 snapshots each.
They can contain all of Drop s control elements or only a subset
’
. Snapshots enable you to automatically turn multiple control elements at once, which
would not be possible with only two hands. You can also execute multiple snapshots at once and combine them.
In addition, snapshots can also hold up to 8 MIDI messages that are being sent as one-shot messages when the snapshot is executed. These MIDI
messages can also contain program change and bank select messages to tell your devices to switch patterns or load the next preset.
Snapshots can be recalled in Jump mode or in Drop mode, or both at the same time. In Jump mode, snapshots are executed with an adjustable fade
time, that can also be zero for immediate execution. In Drop mode, snapshots are scheduled in advance to be executed at the end of the current
playback cycle, which marks the point where the current 1-32 bar pattern ends and the next one begins. In Drop mode, execution takes place with
no fade time, and also automatically ends ongoing Jumps, resulting in a timed and immediate change in music.
With this behavior, the combination of Jumps and Drops makes it easy to create a buildup followed by a sudden drop in music, by virtually turning
parameters on up to eight hardware devices.
You can even go one step further and prepare sequences of Jumps and Drops in advance, using CHAIN mode. That way, you can prepare a song
arrangement using snapshots. Per project, there are 20 chains available with up to 64 snapshots each.
It is up to you as a musician, if and to what extent you want to use snapshots in your performance. Here are some ideas:
•
Safety net when improvising and trying something risky .
“
”
•
Saving the hey, this sounds cool  moment for later, while jamming around.
“
”
•
One-button solution for specific parameters, e.g. resetting effects across all devices.
•
One-button solution to load presets and switch patterns on multiple devices at once.
•
A third hand  that can take care of a sub-task, so you can focus on the fun part .
“
”
“
”
•
Step through your song arrangements manually, one snapshot after another, or fully automated.
33


---

## Page 34

Save snapshots
To save the current state of the control elements, push the SAVE button to enter save view. The control
elements will turn red or green, which indicates if the element will be saved into the snapshot or not.
GREEN: Selected, will be saved into snapshot.
          RED: Deselected, will not be saved into snapshot.
You can now change the state for each control element individually by turning, pushing or moving it.
To save the snapshot, simply press a snapshot button and you are done.
Selection groups help you to get the desired selection of control elements faster.
34
Example: Selected, deselected and
inactive controls which do not have a
mapping yet.
GROUP
The current selection is automatically stored inside one of eight groups. Use the two buttons to select
another group and make a new selection of elements. When you go back to the previous group, the
previous selection is also still there.
This is a fast way to switch between the selections you commonly use in your setup.
Rotary knob
Turn right:
select, LEDs turn green
Turn left:
deselect, LEDs turn red
Rotary push and Round buttons
Push:
toggle selection status
Fader
Move up:
select, LEDs turn green
Move down: deselect, LEDs turn red
Values mode
Instead of selecting and
deselecting control elements,
operation changes their value as
usual.
Color
Set the color of the new snapshot
by turning the menu encoder.
Select mode
By default, the SAVE view starts in
Select mode, described above.
SAVE
Push the snapshot
button where you want
to save the current state
with the current
selection of control
elements.


---

## Page 35

Edit snapshots
Edit existing snapshots. You can also enter MIDI messages that are sent as one-shots when the snapshot is executed.
COPY snapshots
Press Shift + copy to select a source snapshot, then press the target snapshot. Press Shift + copy again
to exit copy mode. Before pressing the target snapshot, you can select options for copying:
Also copy MIDI slots
When active, also the MIDI message slots are copied.
Create Auto name
When active, the target snapshot will get a default auto name.
Otherwise, the source name will be copied, too.
35
Move
Move the selected snapshot to another button.
Caution: Existing snapshots will be overwritten!
Values mode
Instead of selecting and
deselecting control elements,
operation changes their value as
usual.
Color
Change the color of the snapshot
by turning the menu encoder.
Select mode
By default, the EDIT view starts in
Select mode, described on the
previous page.
MIDI message slots
Activate up to 8 slots for different MIDI messages to be sent when the
snapshot is executed. Besides all other
common MIDI message types,
you can also enable Program
Change and Bank Select
messages here. If you send
them to a device running its
own internal sequencer, you
may want to set a Pre-Drop
delay in MENU > Devices,
so that the device receives
the message just before the
pattern ends. Entering a MIDI
message here is similar to
MENU > Mapping, except there
are no curves. Instead, a fixed message value is sent every time.
Note On messages are immediately followed by a Note Off message.
Name
Set a name for the snapshot, to
remember or in CHAIN mode.


---

## Page 36

Jump mode
36
JUMP mode active
Push a snapshot to
initiate the JUMP.
Blue = Currently
executed in JUMP mode.
If enabled in
MENU > Settings,
also multiple snapshots
can be active in parallel. If
there is an overlap in the
control elements, the last
snapshot pushed counts
for these controls.
Fade time
potentiometer
The time it takes for the
control elements to move
their position from the
current state to the
snapshot.
When turned fully left:
No fade time, instant
jump.
When turned fully right:
Maximum fade time, one
full cycle by default, can
be set in MENU >
Settings
Remaining time blue circle line
(
)
The remaining fade time it takes for the
Jump to finish.
You can alter the fade time with the
potentiometer while the JUMP is already
in progress.
The buttons will blink blue, no matter
which view the display currently shows.
That way, you always get a clear feedback
about the JUMP progress.
In Jump mode, snapshots are
executed as soon as the
snapshot button is pressed.
In the PLAY menu, you can set snapshot
quantization in JUMP mode.
The quantization also applies if you
trigger the snapshot remotely via MIDI.
In MENU > Settings > Latest snapshot you
can enable, that the last snapshot
pressed keeps blinking softly. This helps
to remember when performing, how you
got where you currently are.
The blinking can be stopped by stopping
playback or by pressing the JUMP or
DROP button again, depending in which
mode you currently are.


---

## Page 37

Drop mode
37
DROP and JUMP simultaneously
A snapshot is scheduled for a
Drop at the end of the cycle, while
another snapshot is currently
fading in Jump mode.
A Drop will end the Jump
automatically.
That way, you can create a buildup
with a Jump until the Drop
changes the whole set at once.
Drop mode active
Push a snapshot to schedule the
Drop.
Red = The currently scheduled
snapshot in Drop mode.
If enabled in
MENU > Settings,
also multiple snapshots can be
scheduled at the same time. If
their control elements intersect,
the last one pushed overrides
previously pushed ones.
DROP scheduled
The snapshot is scheduled to
be executed at the end of the
cycle, when the playback
position reaches the red line
at the top.
In DROP mode, there is
no fade time. The changes
happen instantly.
SINGLE Drop only occurs once.
REPEAT After the Drop has
been executed, it gets
automatically scheduled again
for the next cycle.
Jump fade time end
The grey line shows where the
Jump would actually end after
the Drop. However, the Drop
will end the ongoing Jump in
advance.


---

## Page 38

Manual fade mode
You can also use the small potentiometer to manually fade from the
current state to another snapshot or a combination of snapshots.
First, hold the Jump button while pressing the snapshot you want to
fade to. You can also select multiple snapshots at once, if it is enabled
in SETTINGS > multiple Jumps. Also here, if there is an overlap
between their control elements, then the ones from the last snapshot
pressed count.
Then, you need to move the potentiometer all to the left in order to
start the manual fade. As soon, as the leftmost position is reached,
you can fade towards the selected snapshots by turning the
potentiometer to the right. In the rightmost position, the snapshots
are faded in at 100%.
Button presses and MIDI data from the snapshot itself like program
(

change messages, etc.  are sent out as soon as the potentiometer
)

leaves the 0% position. If you turn the potentiometer back to 0%,
only button values may change again, but snapshot-contained MIDI
messages will not be sent out again.
There are several ways to leave manual fade mode:
Push one of the bottom circle buttons to exit and leave the state as
it is or leave and reset to the original state we had before the fade.
Also, pushing the Jump button again stops the manual fade and
leaves the state as it is.
You can also schedule a Drop while the manual fade is in operation.
A Drop will also leave the manual fade.
38
Fade to snapshot by hand
The potentiometer determines the fade
amount.
Start manual fade
Push JUMP and a snapshot button
simultaneously to enter manual fade
mode.
Turn the potentiometer all to the left first
to start the actual fade.
Then, turn the potentiometer towards
100% to fade from the current state to
the selected snapshot s .
( )
Exit manual fade mode and leave
everything as it is, or by resetting back to
the initial state.


---

## Page 39

Chain
Workflow
The chain function allows you to prepare and play back a series of
snapshots in a specific order. For example, if you are performing a
song that follows a fixed arrangement, you can set the snapshot
sequence here and then simply start the chain on stage instead of
firing off the snapshots manually.
The chain function offers a high degree of automation. Automating
an entire performance may not be the purpose of a live set, but you
can, for example, automate tedious parts of your performance and
outsource them to Drop so that you have your hands free for other,
more creative tasks.
There are a total of 20 chains, just as there are 20 snapshot banks. If
your performance is song-based, it can make sense to use one bank
and one chain per song. In MENU > Settings, there are two switches
to link banks to chains bidirectionally. Switching bank 1-20 may
automatically select the corresponding chain 1-20, and vice versa.
In chain mode, snapshots are always fired exclusively. You can not
trigger multiple snapshots at the same time with a single chain entry.
However, you can still manually fire snapshots during chain playback
without stopping the chain.
Each chain can be up to 64 snapshots long. The snapshots in a chain
can belong to any of the 20 banks.
39
Chain mode
Push Shift + chain to enter the chain menu.
The snapshot buttons continue to work
normally during chain playback.
The SINGLE and REPEAT buttons are
blinking while a chain is playing.
Push Shift + SINGLE or Shift + REPEAT to
stop chain playback, no matter in which
menu.
Select
Switch to a different chain 1-20. Switching
the chain will stop the currently active
chain. In MENU > Settings, there is a switch
to link chains and snapshot banks in both
directions, so that selecting a bank also
changes the chain and vice versa.
Name
You can give each chain its own name. E.g.
this could be the name of a song.
Add +
Push this button to add a snapshot to the
chain. Use the encoder to select the insert
position. Select Pause  to insert a line
“
”
without firing a snapshot.
Del -
Push this button to delete the currently
selected entry.


---

## Page 40

For each snapshot, you can select Jump or Drop mode, as well as the fade time and the number of beats per cycle that follow. A progress bar and
LED feedback provide information about the playback position. Note: Entry GO 1  is a Drop and has set its length to --- , followed by BUILDUP
“
”
“
”
“
”
which is a Jump.
Note: When the Drop length is set to - , a following Jump will start right after the Drop
“ ”
 has been executed.
40
Circle buttons
LED feedback is shown as usual red or blue
when snapshots are executed in Drop or
Jump mode.
Playback marker
Snapshot INTRO  was fired as a Drop.
“
”
After the Drop, the cycle length was set to
4 bars. Now, the red line shows the time
left until GO 1  is executed as a Drop.
“
”
After that, the cycle length will be 8 bars.
Color
Red = Drop, Blue = Jump, Grey = Pause
Start Stop
Use the upper left circle button to start chain playback at the current cursor position. You can also
start a chain in the middle instead of at the beginning.
Snapshot name
Use Shift + edit to give
snapshots a name.
Cycle length
“Stop“
Do not continue chain
playback after this
snapshot s execution.
’
“-  ”
Leave the cycle length as
it is.
“1-32 Bars  ”
Set the cycle length to
the specified length after
the snapshot was
executed.


---

## Page 41

Push the encoder repeatedly to step through each entry s options.
’
Link Chains and Banks
If you want to build your performance song by song and use one chain per song, it may also be useful to link snapshot banks and chains. For that
reason, there are 20 snapshot banks and 20 chains available per project.
In MENU > Settings, you will find two options for linking.
Chain to Bank
When active, selecting another chain in chain view will automatically select the corresponding snapshot bank.
Bank to Chain
When active, switching banks using the BANK button will automatically select the corresponding chain.
Note: When switching chains, playback of the current chain is stopped.
41
Index
Scroll through the list.
Jump or Drop
Select the type of execution.
Cycle length
After the snapshot was executed.
When the entry is a Jump, the
specified length is also the fade
time.
Move
Change the entry s position
’
within the chain.


---

## Page 42

Clock
Drop s timing can be synchronized with other devices using MIDI clock or CV clock signals.
’

Drop can send MIDI and CV clock signals to other devices and sync its own tempo to incoming
MIDI or CV clock. Push Shift + clock to enter the clock settings menu.
Clock settings
BPM Set the tempo in beats per minute.
Source  Internal
–
Use Drop as the master clock in your setup. Incoming MIDI and CV clock is
ignored.
Source - Ext MIDI Drop syncs its tempo to an incoming MIDI clock signal.
Start/Stop determines, if Drop also listens to Start/Stop messages. If enabled, the Start and Stop
buttons next to the clock button pushed remotely when a Start or Stop message is received. In
Ext MIDI mode, Drop s own Start and Stop buttons still work.
’
If Song Pos is checked, Drop also reacts to incoming song position pointer messages, which
causes a remotely controlled beat jump. Usually, DAWs send these kind of messages when
changing the playback position in the timeline.
Note: When linking another Drop in MENU > Remote Receive, do not activate Song Position
messages here. When syncing Drop from an external sequencer, you probably want to have
Start/Stop enabled and Song Pos disabled.
Source - CV clock Drop syncs its own tempo to an incoming CV clock.
CV1 is always the clock signal, while CV2 can be used as a separate
trigger or gate signal. Clock speed and CV2 s usage must be set in
’
MENU > CV In/Out.
MIDI clock device
Select the MIDI clock source device.
42
Nudge BPM
Use the upper blue buttons to temporarily speed
the tempo up or down. Only available if running on
internal clock.
ReSync
When Drop sends MIDI clock to multiple other
devices, they may still get out of sync due to
different tempo change algorithms or accidentally
pushing the stop button on one device.
ReSync quickly sends a Stop + Start message to all
MIDI clock outputs at the beginning of the next bar,
which is usually inaudible and sets everything back
in sync.


---

## Page 43

Clock delays
Use clock delays to counteract different audio processing latencies of your connected gear.
If an instrument uses any kind of digital signal processing, it inevitably needs a little bit of time, also
called latency, from when e.g. a MIDI note message is received until the sound appears at the device s’
audio output. Manufacturers try to keep the latency as low as possible and if you play only one
instrument alone, you may not even notice. However, if you are running multiple devices in parallel,
different latencies may become audible.
Left   clock delay in milliseconds
–
This delay time is independent of the tempo and counteracts audio processing time.
Right   clock delay in MIDI clocks
–
Only use this if you know what you are doing! Some DAWs and sequencers may not count the first
MIDI clock packet, or also count the start message as a MIDI clock. Use this, to counteract such
misbehavior.
Start off with all clock delays set to 0. Make sure, every device receives MIDI clock by Drop. Start playback and try to find out by ear if a device is
constantly playing a little bit ahead or after. It gets a lot easier if your devices play the same musical pattern, e.g. a short plucky sound every quarter.
If it is unclear, choose a reference device the one you expect to have the largest latency , let it play a pattern and unmute other devices one by one.
(
)
In our experience, hardware gear has very low latency in the 1-3 ms range. DAWs, however, can have significant and varying delay times, depending
on CPU load and audio settings.
Positive delay times are preferred. You can also apply negative delay values. In this case, the clock will speed up a little bit after playback starts, until
the target pre-delay has been reached. So, playback will only be in sync after a short amount of time. For that reason, it is recommended to use
negative clock delays only when necessary.
43


---

## Page 44

Send MIDI clock while stopped
If this option is activated, Drop will send MIDI clock signal also while playback is stopped. This option
should be enabled unless it disturbs a connected device. Sending MIDI clock while being stopped is
typical groovebox behavior. It constantly updates the tempo information on the receiving device, and if
the receiving device is smart enough, you get better timing precision right after starting the clock.
Clock send enable
On the next page, you can enable MIDI clock, transport and song position pointer output for every
physical port separately.
The default setting with the two left checkmarks enabled is the right choice for most grooveboxes,
synths and DAWs send MIDI clock and transport .
(
)
Left   MIDI Clock
–
Sends clock messages, which contain tempo information.
Middle  MIDI Transport
–
Sends start and stop messages, telling the connected device so start/stop playback.
Right  Song position pointer
–
Sends song position pointer messages, telling the connected device the playback position within
Drop s playback cycle. These messages are sent when performing a beatjump. If the receiving
’

sequencer supports it, it changes the playback position as well.
Note: If linking another Drop in  MENU > Remote > Send, do not activate Song Position messages.
Clock to Sub-Ports of USB1/2
MIDI via USB offers up to 16 virtual cables sub-ports .
(
)
Some MIDI USB devices may offer more than one subport, but need to receive MIDI clock only on a specific
one. Therefore, you can select to which sub-ports clock,
transport and song position pointer messages are being
sent and to which ones not.
44


---

## Page 45

CV Config
Drop has two control voltage CV  inputs and outputs each that can be used in different ways. All four CV ports are designed for voltages from 0-5V.
(
)

The outputs can create continuous voltages with a resolution of 12 bits 4096 steps . The CV inputs can read analog voltages with a resolution of 16
(
)
bits 65536 steps . To interface with a bigger modular system, you may want to use a Midi-to-CV converter
(
)

module.
CV OUT 1+2
Signal
Linked Control
Assign any of the control elements directly to the CV output. Turning the
corresponding rotary knob or moving the fader linearly changes the CV output
value between the Min and Max voltage range.
To assign a control element, select the Set Link option. Turn, push, move the
control element you want to assign. Use the clear option to remove the link.
24/12/8/4/2
PPQN Clock
Clock signal with the specified number of pulses per quarter note PPQN .
(
)
Each pulse has a length of 5 ms.
16th/8th/4th/1Bar
Clock 50%
Clock signal with the specified frequency. The PWM duty cycle is 50%.
Start Trig
Outputs a one-shot trigger when playback starts.
Is Running Gate
Outputs the Max voltage while playback is running, and Min when stopped.
Cycle Start Trig
Outputs a trigger at the start of each cycle.
Cycle/Bar Pos CV
Outputs a linearly rising voltage corresponding to the cycle/bar progress.
Jump Prog.
Rise/Fall
Outputs a linearly rising/falling voltage corresponding to the progress within
an ongoing Jump.
45
