# Neuzeit Instruments DROP Manual v1.07 (Pages 16-30)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 16

Output
The physical port USB1-2 or TRS1-4 on which Drop sends MIDI out to the device
Input
The physical port USB1-2 or TRS1-4 on which Drop receives data from the device.
Sub-Port
Only relevant when the device is connected via USB. Some USB devices offer multiple
internal Sub-Ports for communication. Sub-Port 1 works just fine for most USB gear.
If communication to your USB device fails and it offers more than one Sub-Port, try another one.
Unfortunately, sub-ports are often not documented in the device s user manual. You simply
’
have to try.
For the nerds: The Sub-Port corresponds to the cable number CN in the USB MIDI protocol. Sub-ports are also reffered to as virtual cables.
Note: In the clock menu, you can specify to which sub-ports clock and transport messages are being sent.
Gear with MIDI mapping table - Synths and grooveboxes
Enable MIDI Output, and only enable MIDI Input if needed: For example, if the device can send MIDI data back to Drop when turning its knobs, you
can use convenient MIDI Learn for mapping. You should also enable the MIDI Input, if the device includes a MIDI sequencer or a keyboard whose
notes you want to forward to other connected devices.
Gear for MIDI Input only - Keyboards
Usually there is no need to enable MIDI Output, picking only a MIDI Input port is sufficient. To setup MIDI forwarding to another device, use the
target device s MERGER function, described on the following pages.
’
Gear with own MIDI mapping - DAWs and workstations
Generally, you should enable both, MIDI Input and Output, and do the mapping on your DAW or workstation. You might also prefer USB over TRS
MIDI. Usually, DAWs and workstations offer their own internal MIDI Learn function and parameter mapping. Use MENU > Project > DAW Init to
quickly apply a default initialization for use with a DAW.
16
Example: This is how a synth with two USB
sub-ports shows up in Ableton Live.


---

## Page 17

Program Change Pre-Delay
This is a useful feature for grooveboxes that need to receive program
change messages just a little bit before their internal sequencer s pattern ends.
’
Let s assume, you schedule a snapshot in Drop mode fires at the end of a cycle  and that snapshot contains
’
(
)

a program change message to tell your groovebox to switch to the next pattern. The groovebox may need
to know about the pattern change a little earlier, just before the pattern ends, so it has some
time left to prepare everything for the pattern change. This is what we call a pre-delay. You can select from
different values, like a fixed number of milliseconds or tempo-dependent values like 3/16th notes.
You want the Program Change Pre-Delay to be as small as possible and as large as necessary.
Sequencer-based devices (grooveboxes) may need a time-related value like 3/16th notes, while synths
may need a fixed amount of time to load a new preset.
You simply have to try out which pre-delay value works best for your device.
Database
Drop ships with the open-source MIDI CC & NRPN database from Pencil Research on its SDcard. This database contains mapping tables of popular MIDI gear and simplifies the mapping process.
Navigate through the database and check if your device is supported. If so, selecting it can make mapping
more convenient.
The database can be found on https://github.com/pencilresearch/midi
To get the latest version of the database, simply open the link on your computer, click on the green button
Code > download ZIP. Then extract the folder on your computer and move it into the root folder of Drop s’
SD-card. The database folder must be named /midi-main which is the default name the database already
has when downloading it.
17
Navigate through the CC & NRPN mapping
database and check if your device is included.


---

## Page 18

Devices Merger
Drop s MIDI merger allows you to forward MIDI input data to a
’

MIDI output. You can even modify incoming data before it gets
forwarded, like transposing MIDI notes.
Use case:
You want to control your synth by Drop s controls, but it should
’

also receive notes from a MIDI keyboard. However, your synth
only has one MIDI-In port. This means, the MIDI data from Drop s’
controls must be merged together with the MIDI data from the
keyboard.
18
Example: Merging a MIDI sequencer, a keyboard and Drop s control elements to
’
a synth. Notes can be transposed by Drop s control elements along the way.
’


---

## Page 19

In order to do this, you need to create two devices on Drop: One for the synth and one for the keyboard. The synth device needs to have a MIDI
Output port selected, the keyboard must have a MIDI Input port.
Now, in the Devices menu, select the receiving device the synth  with the lower two buttons dark blue . Scroll down to the MERGER part. Select
(
)
(
)
Merger 1-4 with the upper buttons light blue  and turn the switch ON to activate the Merger.
(
)
Each device has its own 4 Merger instances. That means, per device you can forward up to 4 different MIDI input streams, which come from
other connected devices.
Merge Activate the merger instance.
Input  The device from which this merger instance receives incoming MIDI
data. Obviously, the selected device must have a MIDI Input enabled.
Listen to Channels  Select the MIDI channels on which the input device sends
the relevant data. This does not necessarily have to match the receiver s MIDI
’

channel. It should simply cover the channels which carry the data that is
relevant for the MIDI stream you want to capture.
Use Drop s MIDI monitor to inspect the MIDI data that comes in.
’
Set the message filters and channel selection in a way, so that the
receiving device only gets MIDI data it actually understands. Avoid
unnecessary MIDI traffic for best responsiveness.
Note: Incoming SysEx messages are not forwarded to the receiver. This is because SysEx could potentially block the whole traffic as long as
the sender wants.
19
Select the output device
Here: Device 3 out of 8
named WARP
Select the Merger instance
Here: Merger 1 out of 4
Activate the Merger


---

## Page 20

As a best-practice, you should configure your input device first, so that it only sends relevant data and
does not spam unnecessary messages around. Do this as far as possible, and filter out the rest in Drop s’
MIDI Merger.
Notes
Filter On/Off for MIDI note events
Bank, CC
Filter On/Off for CC messages. This also includes 14-bit CC messages, NRPN messages and
Bank Select messages.
Pitchbend
On/Off filter MIDI pitchbend data.
Aftertouch On/Off filter MIDI aftertouch, including channel pressure and polyphonic key pressure.
Prog Chg
On/Off filter MIDI program change messages
Target Channel
No Change:
Leave the MIDI channel as it comes in.
By Device:
Modify the channel to the device s Default Channel.
’
Channel 1-16:
Modify the channel to this channel number.
Note Gate
Enables mute/unmute functionality for incoming MIDI notes.
Off: Note Gate function disabled.
On: Note Gate enabled. Control element max value = notes pass, min = blocked
On, inverted: Note Gate enabled. Control element max = notes blocked, min = pass.
Link
Link one of the control elements to the Note Gate function. Press Link
, so the control
“
…”
elements will start to blink. Then, turn/move/push the control element you want to assign.
clear
Push the menu encoder to clear the assigned control element.
20
Enable only the MIDI message types
your target synth should receive


---

## Page 21

The merger also offers note transposition. Notes can be shifted by semitones and octaves. Both menus
are similar.
Semitone / Octave Enables note semitone/octave shifting functionality for incoming MIDI notes.
Shift/Min
The lower boundary of the shifting range. If no Link is set, MIDI notes are always shifted by
that number of semitones/octaves.
Max
The upper boundary of the shifting range. If a Link is set, the MIDI note shifting range goes
from the minimum to the maximum value.
Link
Link one of the control elements to the octave shift function. Press Link
, so the control
“
…”
elements will start to blink. Then, turn/move/push the control element you want to assign.
clear

←
Push the menu encoder to clear the assigned control element.
Tip: When linking a rotary control to note shifting, you can also select one of the stepped LED
feedback options, so the LED ring jumps in discrete steps instead of moving continuously. Additionally,
you can assign the push function of the rotary control to reset the rotary knob to the center/left/right
position and thereby reset the transposition.
Note: When the MIDI cable of a sequencer or keyboard is pulled out while some notes are still on,
they will stay on forever as the receiving synth never receives the corresponding Note-Off message.
This is a classic thing to happen with MIDI, and requires a note panic  to be sent which will stop all
“
”

notes. You can force a note panic by pushing Shift + MENU or stopping playback.
21


---

## Page 22

Mapping
Once you have set up your devices, we can start mapping the controls! But first things first
 There are two main categories of MIDI receiving
…
devices that you should be aware of.
Devices with fixed mapping table synths, grooveboxes
(
)
Most synths and grooveboxes offer a MIDI mapping table in their manual, which is a list of device parameters e.g. volume, cutoff frequency, etc.
(
)
that can be remotely controlled via MIDI. The device expects a specific MIDI message e.g. CC message #13 value range 0-127  per parameter and
(
)
you need to configure your MIDI sender Drop  to transmit exactly that message in order to control that parameter.
(
)
For devices with a fixed MIDI table, it is best practice to start off with an empty project and populate Drop s controls bit by bit.
’
This kind of mapping can be quite a bit of work. Therefore, Drop offers different ways to help you get through this process as fast as possible.
•
Look up the MIDI mapping table of your synth and manually enter the MIDI message type, numbers, value ranges on Drop.
•
Your device can send MIDI out when you turn its knobs? Great! You can use MIDI learn on Drop which significantly speeds up the mapping
process. First, ensure your device actually sends MIDI data often, this must be enabled in its settings  and connect the device s MIDI out to
(
)
’
Drop s MIDI in, so that communication works in both directions. Also ensure that in Drop s Device settings, you enabled and selected the
’
’
corresponding MIDI input. On Drop, you can go to PLAY > Monitor to check and verify the incoming and outgoing messages.
•
If your device is listed in the Pencil Research MIDI database on Drop s SD-card, you can select the device parameter from the database. This is
’
a convenient alternative to look up the parameter name in the device s manual and entering the MIDI control parameters by hand on Drop.
’
22
Example of a typical MIDI mapping table, taken from the
Elektron Rytm MK1 manual


---

## Page 23

Devices with MIDI learn DAW, workstations
(
)
Software DAWs e.g. Ableton Live  or hardware workstations e.g. Akai MPC series  have so many parameters that it is just too many for a fixed
(
)
(
)
mapping table. Instead, they offer a MIDI-Learn function to map parameters to incoming MIDI messages. For the DAW, it doesn t matter which
’
specific MIDI message your controller sends, as long as it is a unique message per control.
Go to Project > DAW Init to quickly apply a default mapping to use Drop with a DAW. This function sets MIDI messages to each of Drop s control
’
elements at once, so that each control element sends out a different MIDI CC or MIDI note message.
23
Example of MIDI mapping in a DAW (Ableton Live)


---

## Page 24

Control element configuration
Navigate to MENU > Mapping and turn, push, move the control element you want to configure.
On the first pages of the mapping menu, you can define the overall look and behavior of the control
element.
Active
Turn the control element on or off. If you re-activate a control element, it still remembers
its settings from before.
Color
Drop offers 9 colors for its control elements that are easy to distinguish from each other.
Name
You can name the control element. This makes it easier for you to get back at your live set
after a longer time if color coding is not enough to get used to it again. When you move a control
element, its name is displayed on the screen when in PLAY view. You can disable this in the settings.
Behavior
Describes the physical behavior of the control element. It is different, depending on the
type of control element.
Rotary knob turn
Precision
Slow turning speed for precise adjustments.
Dynamic Pot
Emulates potentiometer behavior, so that the physical position corresponds to the LED ring. When turning
slowly, precise adjustments are possible, though.
Dynamic Fast
Sensitive to manual movement. When turning slowly, precise adjustments are still possible, though.
Rotary knob push
Toggle
Pressing the rotary knob functions as a separate MIDI button. Each push alternately sends the MIDI min or
max value and turns the button on or off.
Temporary
Pressing the rotary knob functions as a separate MIDI button. When pressed, the MIDI maximum value is sent;
when released, the minimum value is sent. Use this setting with a DAW that sends MIDI feedback to Drop.
Quick Turn
While pressed, the turning knob speed is 4x faster.
Reset Left/
Center/Right
Resets the rotary to its left/center/right position when pressed.
24


---

## Page 25

Mute button
Toggle
Each push alternately sends the MIDI min or max value and turns the button on or off.
Temporary
When pressed, the MIDI maximum value is sent; when released, the minimum value is sent. Use this setting
with a DAW that sends MIDI feedback to Drop.
Fader
Layer AB dual
Layer A and B offer their own separate faders, similar to Rotary knobs and Mute buttons.
Layer A only
The fader of Layer A is in permanent operation, even when on Layer B.
This setting is convenient if you do not need a separate fader on Layer B and want permanent access without
value-catch to the fader on Layer A.
As the faders can not automatically change their physical position, it is required to manually move the fader
cap to the underlying virtual position before the fader reacts to manual movement.
LED style
Only accessible for rotary knob turn. Choose from different LED ring styles.
Rotary knob turn
Line from left
For 0-100% unidirectional values. A line of LEDs ranging from 0 to the knob s position.
’
Line from center For ±100% bidirectional values. A line of LEDs ranging from the top to knob s position on the left or right side.
’
Dot
Universal minimalist setting that only shows an LED dot at the knob s internal position.
’
1-25 Steps
Using the single LEDs of the LED ring to visualize discrete steps.
Example use case:
Mapping a rotary knob to an oscillator s octave setting. Assume the range goes from
’
-2 to +2 octaves, that makes 5 steps (-2, -1, 0, +1, +2) and you get a nice visualization with the 5 Steps setting.
Blank
The internal value is not shown at all.
This LED style is useful in combination with the Relative  MIDI output curve. In this mode, the rotary knob
“
”
does not send its internal absolute position, but instead only its relative change if it is turned left or right. Your
target application may require relative MIDI data for scrolling through DAW clip scenes or a file list in a
browser. In such cases, the internal value of the rotary knob is also irrelevant, so we don t need to show it.
’
25


---

## Page 26

Drop Prio
When the control element is used in a snapshot that is fired in Drop mode, you can
select Normal or PreDrop priority. This affects micro timing of MIDI messages in a Drop.
Normal
Use this by default. The MIDI output of the control element is sent right after the Drop.
PreDrop
The MIDI output of the control element is sent right before the Drop and a second time
right after the Drop.
Example use case:
The control element is mapped to the kick drum Mute function of a groovebox. The groovebox runs its
own internal sequencer. You also have a snapshot that re-enables the kick drum.
When firing this snapshot in Drop mode, it musically releases the energy after a peak moment. With
Normal priority, the MIDI message for Mute re-enable is sent an instant after the Drop moment, but it
might be just too late and we might miss out the first kick at the downbeat of the new bar.
By enabling PreDrop priority, the Mute enable message is sent additionally just before the Drop moment, which ensures the kick is enabled at the
downbeat of the next bar.
CV Out link Shows, if a control element is mapped to the CV OUT 1 or 2 jack.
You can use the control elements not only to send out MIDI, but also to control the two CV outputs. The CV outputs may be configured as clock
signals, but they can also be used as simple variable linear voltage outputs in MENU > CV Config. There, you can also set the voltage range 0,0 to
(
5,0 Volts, 12-bit DAC .)
The actual linkage of a control element to a CV output is in MENU > CV Config.
Merge link
Shows, if the control element is linked to any parameter in a Device Merger.
You can use the control elements not only to send out MIDI, but also to manipulate incoming MIDI data that passes through the Device Merger. The
Device Merger offers manipulation of incoming MIDI data before it is redirected to another device e.g. note transposition . The manipulation
(
)
parameters can be mapped to Drop s control elements.
’
The actual linkage of a control element to a Merger parameter is in MENU > Devices.
26


---

## Page 27

Feedback by MIDI-In
Drop s control elements can not only send out MIDI data,
’

they can also be remotely controlled by receiving MIDI, also
called Feedback. You can enable MIDI feedback separately
for each control element.
However, if you enable MIDI Feedback, it must always
correspond to one of the slots for MIDI-Output. These are
the requirements:
- The MIDI device linked to the slot must have a MIDI-Input
port set in MENU > Devices.
- Slot curve should be set to Linear, as incoming feedback
messages will also be mapped in a linear way back to the
control element s position.
’
- NRPN messages are not supported for MIDI feedback
Hardware gear usually does not send MIDI feedback when
switching programs/presets, as it would most likely cause
traffic overload. MIDI feedback is only sent when turning a
knob on the device. This raises the question, if MIDI feedback
is necessary for hardware gear at all. DAWs however offer
good support for MIDI feedback.
27


---

## Page 28

MIDI Output slots
Each control element offers eight slots for different MIDI Output messages to different devices.
Slot
Activate the slot.
Device
Select one of the eight devices configured in MENU > Devices
Channel
The MIDI channel 1-16. Select by device  to use the default channel of the device.
“
”
Msg Type
The MIDI message type. These message types are available:
Note On
Buttons + snapshots
only
Mostly used for on/off parameters.
CC
All controls + snapshots Most commonly used control change message.
CC 14
CC 14 LSB first
All controls + snapshots Two consecutive CC messages for high 14-bit resolution.
Typically used for coarse and fine adjustment of a
parameter. LSB or MSB first default
(
)
NRPN
All controls + snapshots Some hardware devices offer NRPN access to their
parameters, which offers high 14-bit resolution and
more parameter numbers than CC. If your device offers
both CC and NRPN for the same parameter, CC has
lower resolution but is preferred for fast response times.
Pitchbend
All controls + snapshots Pitchbend message type, 14-bit resolution.
Aftertouch
All controls + snapshots Channel pressure message type.
ProgChg
Snapshots
Program change message, commonly used to switch
presets or patterns, value range 0-127.
Prog + Bank
Snapshots
Bank select and program change afterwards. Required
by some devices that offer more than 128
presets/patterns.
28
Select the mapping slot
Here: Slot 2 out of 8. Slots
1, 2, 4 are set active.
MIDI Learn
A convenient way to
learn the MIDI
parameters as the
hardware device sends
them. First, verify that
the device sends MIDI
back to Drop as you
move its knobs.
MIDI Database
If your hardware device
is featured in the
database, this is an
alternative to looking up
MIDI parameters in
device s manual.
’
Select the database file
in the device menu first.


---

## Page 29

Message # The message number. If the message type requires it, this may be split into MSB and
LSB
most significant and least significant
(

byte .)
On the next page, the output range and curve of the slot can be set.
Max
The upper limit of the output curve.
Min
The lower limit of the output curve.
Depending on the message type, Min and Max may have different value ranges. For example, Note
On and CC messages range from 0 to 127, while NRPN and CC 14-bit go from 0 to 16383 and
pitchbend from -8192 to +8191. These are simply the values the MIDI protocol offers.
Shift + Turn the menu encoder to do coarse / fine value adjustments.
Curve
Only available for faders and rotary knobs.
Select from several output curve types: Linear, Exponential, only the left or right half, On-Off
curves with different thresholds, curves with 1-25 steps, relative encoder messages.
When sending MIDI to a DAW or workstation which offers internal mapping, use the default
Linear curve with full value range to get the best resolution and correct MIDI feedback.
Then, apply the desired value range and curves within the DAW s mapping.
’
29
Invert
Switches Min and Max
value, which inverts the
curve on the Y-axis.
Duplicate
Copy-and-paste the
current slot to the
next free one.
Example:
- Linear curve on the
left half of the X-axis.
- Inverted Min
 Max
↔
- NRPN message type,
which offers a value
range of
0-16383.
Default Linear curve
Example:
- Exponential curve
- Full value range
- CC message type, which
offers a value range of
0-127.
Tip: While holding Shift and turning/pushing/moving the control element, it only sends out the currently selected slot. This may help if you apply
mapping on the target device (e.g. in a DAW).


---

## Page 30

MIDI Learn
Drop can listen to incoming MIDI messages, pick a message, and apply its parameters to a control element as outgoing MIDI message.
This is how it works: Some hardware devices can send MIDI on their output port when turning a potentiometer or changing a parameter. Usually, this
is the same message type, channel and number which the device also expects as input to control the parameter.
First, make sure the connected device actually sends MIDI output for parameter changes. Many devices require this option to be activated in their
settings first. Also, connect the MIDI output of your hardware device to one of Drop s MIDI inputs
’
, or use USB instead.
When in MENU > Mapping, enter the slot you want to map and push the Learn button on the top right.
Now, Drop shows live recording of incoming MIDI messages. On the device, move the parameter you want to map, and Drop should receive the
corresponding MIDI messages. Use the lower two buttons to select another MIDI input port if necessary.
Press the upper right button to stop live recording, then scroll through the history list and select the message you want to map by pushing the menu
encoder.
Usually, it is the newest message top position , but
(
)

sometimes a device parameter sends several
messages at once, so you can select the right
message from the history list.
If you only need your device s incoming MIDI
’

messages for MIDI Learn, you can remove the cable
again after mapping.
Note: Messages that can not be assigned to the
control element are shown in red. E.g. Note messages
can not be assigned to rotary encoders and faders.
30
