# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 76-90)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 76

76

Screen Brightness: This determines the brightness of the screen during normal operation: normal brightness (Day)
or dimmed (Night).
Tap Tempo: This determines how many times you must press the Tap button before the new tempo is recognized.
Flash Tap Tempo Light: When enabled, the Tap button’s light will flash in time with the tempo. When disabled, the
Tap button’s light will be off.
Global Pitch Bend: Enable this option to override the pitch bend settings of all programs, so that those with pitch bend
disabled or set to different ranges will only use the Global Range instead (set here using Range Up and Range Down).
When disabled, all programs may use their individual pitch bend settings.
Date: This is the current date, formatted as Month / Day / Year. When saving files on Force in Standalone Mode, the
file will include the current date in its metadata.
Time: This is the current time, formatted as Hour : Minute. When saving files on Force in Standalone Mode, the file
will include the current time in its metadata.
Time Zone: This is the current time zone, formatted as Continent / City, which you can change here.

Sequencer
The settings on this screen determine how sequencing works in the Event View and in the Step Sequencer.
Rec Arm: This determines the behavior of the Record Arm buttons. In Single mode, selecting a different track will
automatically arm that track and disarm all other tracks. In Multi mode, you can tap any track's record button to add it
to the group of armed tracks.
Record Pad Aftertouch Events: When enabled, pad aftertouch data (from the Force hardware’s pressure-sensitive
pads) will be recorded. When disabled, pad aftertouch data will be ignored.
Place Events Recorded During Count-In at Start Point: When enabled, pressing a pad during the recording’s precount will record that note event at the start of the recording (this is how the MPC3000 worked). When disabled, no
notes will be recorded until the pre-count is finished and recording has begun.
Note: This setting is ignored when recording with the Arpeggiator active.
Recording Note Length: This determines if/how events are cropped if they exceed the length of the current Clip when
recording:
Truncate to Clip Length: If the length of an event exceeds the length of the clip, it will be truncated. This ensures
that the event will not overlap itself when the clip loops.
Truncate to Clip End: If an event exceeds the length of the clip, it will be truncated to the end of the current clip.
In other words, the event will stop playing when the clip ends or loops.
As Played: Events will play back exactly as they were recorded, even if they overlap themselves when the clip loops.
For example, if you record a note starting on the second bar of a 4-bar loop and
hold it for 5 bars, the note will end: at bar 7 (As Played), at bar 6 (To Clip Length),
or bar 4 (To Clip End). See image for details.
Playback Note Length: This determines if/how events are cropped if they exceed
the length of the current Clip during playback:
As Recorded: Events will play back exactly as they were recorded, even if they overlap themselves when the clip
loops.
Truncate to Clip Length: If the length of an event exceeds the length of the clip, it will be truncated. This ensures
that the event will not overlap itself when the clip loops.
Knob Swing Control Applies TC Settings on Release: When enabled, turning the knob assigned to Swing and then
releasing it will immediately apply that Swing setting. When disabled, you must use the Timing Correct window to
apply the Swing setting.
Display Resolution: This is the display resolution (in PPQN—pulses per quarter note) of pulse values in certain areas
of the operating system. Please note that this setting affects the display resolution, not the timing.

Bar 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
As played
To Clip Length
To Clip End


---

## Page 77

77

Project Defaults
The settings on this screen determine various default values for any new project that you create.
New Project Dialog: This determines what options you see when you start a new project. When set to Off, a new
project will be empty with no preconfigured settings except for the project defaults shown here. When set to Demo,
you can choose to load a demo project (from several different genres) as a starting point or an empty project. When
set to Demo/Template/Recent, you can choose to load a demo project, a project template file, or an empty project.
You must have a project in the Template File field of the Project Load/Save tab to select a template in this window.
Default Tempo: This is the default tempo in BPM.
Default Arrangement Bars: This is the default number of bars in a new project arrangement.
Default Arrangement Loop Enabled: This determines whether loop is activated when a new project is created or not.
Default Pad Slice: This determines how new samples will play when you load them or record them into a project. When
set to Pad, the Slice menu in Track Edit Mode will be set to Pad, which lets you set the start point, end point, etc. for
the layer. When set to All, the Slice menu in Track Edit Mode will be set to All, in which the entire sample plays.
Default Drum/Keygroup Filter: This determines the default type of filter that drum and keygroup tracks will use. See
Appendix > Glossary > Filter to learn about this.
Default Plugin Synth: This determines the default instrument plugin that a new plugin track will use. Use the window
that appears to select it.
Default Audio Monitor: This determines the default audio monitoring mode: Off, In, Auto, or Merge.
Default MIDI Monitor: This determines the default MIDI monitoring mode: Off, In, Auto, or Merge.

Project Load/Save
The settings on this screen determine if (and how) projects are automatically saved.
Temporary File Location: This determines the file location where files are streamed from disk for unsaved projects.
For best results, we recommend using a solid-state drive (SSD) connected to Force’s internal SATA port.
Auto Save Enabled: When enabled, your project will automatically save after each Timeout interval. When disabled,
your project will not be automatically saved; you may save only manually.
Timeout: Use this field to select how often your project will automatically save.
Template File: Use this field to select a project template that will load automatically when you select User Template
in the New Project Dialog window. (If you select the Save as Template box when saving a file, it will be shown in
this field.) In order for the User Template option to be available, New Project Dialog (in the Project Defaults tab)
must be set to Demo or Demo/Template/Recent.

General
The settings on this screen determine how other features work in the hardware and operating system.
Vintage Mode: This determines the type of emulation applied to the audio output. You can apply the particular sonic
qualities of, for example, the MPC3000 or MPC60, or of course no emulation (None).
Audition Auto Play: This determines how long a sample will sound when auto-previewing it.
Audition Outputs: This determines which pair of outputs will play any auditioned sounds. These sounds include:
samples, tracks, and projects in the Browser; sample playback, Cue Preview, and Slice Preview in Sample Edit
Mode; and sample playback in the Keep or Discard Sample window in the Sampler.
Cue Preview: This determines if/how audio is played as you move the cue playhead. As you move the cue playhead
through a sample waveform, you can set it to play the small part of the sample before the cue playhead (Before), play
the small part of the sample after the cue playhead (After), or not play at all (Off). You can also set this in Sample Edit
Mode (see Modes > Sample Edit Mode > Settings).
Slice Preview: This determines if/how audio is played as you move a slice marker. As you move the slice marker
through a sample waveform, you can set it to play the small part of the sample before the slice marker (Before), play
the small part of the sample after the slice marker (After), or not play at all (Off). You can also set this in Sample Edit
Mode (see Modes > Sample Edit Mode > Settings).
Show Mode Shortcut Panel: This setting determines whether the slide-out Mode Shortcut panel is visible (On) or not
(Off). See Addenda > Updates in Force 3.2 > New Features > Menu Editing and Shortcut Panel for more information.


---

## Page 78

78

Splice
Use this screen to connect a Splice account and download samples to your device via a network.

To access Splice:
1. First, make sure your Force hardware is connected to a network via Wi-Fi or Ethernet. See Preferences > Wi-Fi
or Preferences > Ethernet to learn how to connect to a network. You will also need access to a web browser.
2. Navigate to the Splice tab in the Preferences page.
3. Tap the Get Login Code button. (If you are not connected to a network, you will be prompted to do so before the
Get Login Code button appears.)
4. Follow the on-screen instructions to pair your Force to your Splice account via a web browser. It may take your
Force a few moments to successfully link.
5. A message will appear on screen when the link has been successfully established. Tap OK to continue and return
to the Splice Preferences page.
6. Once the process is complete and your Force has been paired to your Splice account, use the Sync Files button
to download your samples via Wi-Fi to a drive of your choice.
By default, files will be stored on the Internal drive. You can change the selected drive by tapping the Change
button under Sync Files To Drive.

To browse samples imported from Splice:
1. Open the Browser.
2. Under the Content tab, press the Splice shortcut icon to view samples downloaded from your Splice account.
If nothing appears, make sure that you have connected your Splice account and synced your files by following
the directions above.
3. The right-side of the browser will display your Splice samples organized into a series of top level folders, allowing
you to easily browse your sample library by BPM, Instrument, Key, Pack or Tag. The All Your Samples folder will
show a list of all samples you have downloaded.

Note: The original sample files from Splice are stored in the By Pack folder on your selected drive. Other folders such
as By Instrument contain internal links to help sort these samples by various tags. If the By Pack folder on your drive
is deleted, the files in the remaining folders will become unusable. To fully remove all files, the entire Splice directory
should be deleted.
IMPORTANT: Drives formatted using the FAT32 system do not support these internal links. For these drives, samples
will only be sorted in the By Pack folder. We recommend using an exFAT file system on external drives used with
Force, as it is the most robust one supported by both Windows and macOS.

To view the number of samples available to download from your account, tap the Check For Update button.

To log out of a Splice account, tap the Log Out button.


---

## Page 79

79

Sync

Tap the Sync field (in the center of the top of the screen) and then turn the data dial or use the –/+
buttons to set whether your Force hardware receives MIDI Clock information (MIDI Clock), MIDI Time
Code information (MTC), communication from Ableton Link, or none of these (Off). Alternatively,
double-tap Sync and tap the desired option to select it.
This is the same setting as the Receive menu in the MIDI / Sync tab of your Preferences. See
Preferences > MIDI / Sync for more information.
Note: Ableton Link is a new technology that synchronizes beat, phase and tempo of Ableton Live and
Ableton Link-enabled applications over a wireless or wired network. See Preferences > Wi-Fi or
Preferences > Ethernet to learn how to connect to a network.

Undo History

To open the Undo History window, tap the clock icon at the top of the screen. In the Undo History window, you can
view a list of recent actions along with a detail about the action if applicable.

To undo an action, tap Undo.
To redo an action, tap Redo.
Alternatively, tap and drag the red line in the action list to quickly undo or redo multiple actions. Actions below the red
line in grey have been undone.
To close the Undo History window, tap Close or the X.


---

## Page 80

80

Tuner

Tap the tuning fork at the top of the screen to open the built-in tuner.
The tuner allows you to easily tune any connected audio sources such
as guitars, basses, synth modules, and other pitched instruments.
To select the input for the instrument you would like to tune,
use the Input Channel field.
To set the base tuning frequency, use the Frequency of A field.
To tune your instrument, play a note and use the indicator to
adjust your instrument to the correct pitch.
To close the tuner screen, tap Close, the X in the upper-right
corner, or anywhere outside the window.

MIDI Monitor

Tap the I/O icons to open Force's MIDI monitor. You can use this to
view incoming and outgoing MIDI data from devices connected to
Force.
To view incoming MIDI data, tap the In button.
To view outgoing MIDI data, tap the Out button.
To clear the list of MIDI data, tap the Clear button.
To close the MIDI Monitor, tap the Close button or the X.

Mode

Tap this icon to switch Force to Computer Mode. In the screen that
appears, select whether you want to continue to Computer Mode or
Cancel and return to your current mode and project. It is recommended
to save your project before switching to Computer Mode since you
cannot freely switch between Standalone and Computer Modes without
also closing your current project.
See Standalone vs. Computer Mode to learn more.


---

## Page 81

81

System Resources

Tap one of these icons to show the System Resources window for Force.

The indicators in this window show current usage statistics:
CPU: The CPU indicator shows the current CPU as a percentage.
RAM Usage: The Mem indicator shows your Force hardware’s current RAM usage.
Important: If you encounter a warning that there is not enough memory to complete an action while using your Force
hardware, do the following to make more memory available:
Make sure all audio tracks in your project are not record-armed.
Delete samples from your project’s sample pool that were there before the warning appeared.
If you are still seeing the warning, do the following:
1. Manually undo the last action you performed before seeing the warning (you may not be able to use the Undo
button for this due to how the undo history is stored in RAM).
2. Save your project.
3. Do one of the following, and then load your saved project again.
• In the Menu, tap the folder icon at the top of the screen, and then tap New at the bottom of the screen.
• Power your Force hardware off and then on again.
• Open the Menu and tap Preferences to open the Preferences. In the Preferences, tap Reset Preferences at
the bottom of the screen, tap OK, and then tap Restart to reset the Preferences.
• Enter Computer Mode and then reenter Standalone Mode.
Important: Although you can load multiple files at once, any samples you load into a project will be automatically
converted to full-quality uncompressed audio files, so they may use more storage space than they do on your external
storage device. If you are unable to load multiple files at once due to this, select fewer files and try again.
Drives: The Drives indicator shows the available storage space on any detected external storage devices or the internal
drive of Force.

To delete samples from the project (to create more free RAM space for sampling time, audio recording, etc.), tap Purge.
In the screen that appears, tap Unused Samples to delete all unused samples from the project, tap All Samples to delete
all samples from the project (from all kits, audio or MIDI tracks), or tap Cancel to return to the previous screen.
To close the System Resources window, tap OK, the X in the upper-right corner, or anywhere outside the window.


---

## Page 82

82

Save Window

The Save Window lets you save your project, tracks and clips in a variety of ways.
To open the Save window, press the Save button. Alternatively, press Menu to open the Menu and then tap Save
at the top of the screen.

To save a project, tap Project or Project As. If a project has not been saved before, both options will open the Save
window, described below. If a project has been saved before, tapping Project will automatically overwrite the most
recently saved version.
To open a new project, tap New Project.
To save the current track, tap Track.
To save the current track inserts, tap Track FX Rack.
To save the current drum kit, tap Drum Kit when a Drum track is selected.
To save the current plugin program, tap Plugin Program when a Program track is selected.
To save the current keygroup, tap Keygroup when a Keygroup track is selected.
To save the current MIDI program, tap MIDI Program when a MIDI track is selected.
To save the current CV program, tap CV Program when a MIDI track is selected.
To save the currently selected clip as audio, tap Clip as Audio when a clip is selected.
Use the Base File Name field to name the resulting export based on the Clip name or Track name.
Check the Include Track Volume/Pan Settings box to include these settings in the export.
Check the Bypass Track Effects Plugins box to not include track effects plugins in the export.
Use the Audio Tail field to set the amount, in seconds, of extra time added to the end of the resulting audio files.
Use the Bit Depth field to set the bit depth to 8, 16 or 24.
Use the Sample Rate field to set the sample rate to 44.1, 48, 88.2 or 96 kHz. In most cases, we recommend
selecting 44.1 kHz.
To save the currently selected clip as MIDI, tap Clip as MIDI when a MIDI clip is selected.
Use the Export MIDI As field to set the export the clip(s) as MIDI files or MPC Pattern files.
Use the Base File Name field to name the resulting export based on the Clip name or Track name.
To save all current clips in the project, tap All Clips.
Use the same settings for Clip as Audio or Clip as MIDI depending on how you would like to save the clips.


---

## Page 83

83

To save the project as an audio mixdown, tap Audio Mixdown.
Use the Start Bar and End Bar fields under Audio Length to set the time range that you want to mix down. You
can add a number of seconds to the end of the mixdown to capture any ringing notes or effects (such as a reverb
tail) by adjusting the Audio Tail field.
Use the fields under Render Source and Render Options to set the parameters for the audio mixdown. Check
the Separate Tracks box to render each track of the arrangement as stems.
Use the fields at the bottom of the screen to configure the audio mixdown settings. You can set the File Format,
Bit Depth, and Sample Rate.
To save the project as an Ableton Live set, tap Ableton Live Set.
Use the Export MIDI As settings to choose how MIDI tracks and clips are exported, either as Audio files or MIDI
files. When using Plugin, Drum or Keygroup tracks, you can render clips as Audio to preserve the sound of the
instruments, or render clips as MIDI data.
Check the Export Arrange as Clips box to save the arrangement as a clip row.
Check the Include Program Volume/Pan Settings box to include these settings in the export. When disabled,
the volume and pan settings will be set to 0 dB and center (C), respectively.
Check the Bypass Track Effects Plugins box to deactivate any third-party effect plugins used with the track for
the export. When disabled, those effects will be activated.
Use the Audio Tail field to set the amount, in seconds, of extra time added to the end of the resulting audio files.
Use the Bit Depth field to set the bit depth to 8, 16 or 24.
Use the Sample Rate field to set the sample rate to 44.1, 48, 88.2 or 96 kHz.

After selecting the save type, use the following to select a save location:
To select the storage device you want to view, tap it in the
Storage column on the left.
Internal is the internal drive of Force.
Force Documents is a shortcut to the Force Documents
folder on the internal drive of Force.
If you have storage devices connected to USB ports or SD card
slot of Force, they will appear in this column, as well.
To enter a folder, double-tap it. Alternatively, turn the data dial or
use the –/+ buttons to move through the list, and press the data
dial to enter a folder. You can also tap one of the five folder
buttons in the upper-right to jump immediately to those preassigned file paths (see Modes > Browser to learn how to do this).
To create a new folder, tap New Folder, use the virtual keyboard that appears to enter a name, and then tap Do It.
You will immediately enter the new folder.
To move up one folder level, tap the folder/ icon in the upper-left corner.
To name the file, tap the File Name field at the bottom of the screen, and use the virtual keyboard that appears.
To save the file, tap Save.
To save the file as a project template file, tap the Save as Template checkbox to check it before tapping Save.
(This file will be shown in the Template File field in the Preferences’ Project Load/Save tab.)
To cancel and return to the Menu, tap Cancel. Alternatively, tap the  icon in the upper-left corner.


---

## Page 84

84

Pull-Down Menu

The pull-down can be accessed from any Force mode, giving you quick and easy access to a variety of commonly used
tools and information.
To open the pull-down menu, tap and drag from the middle-top of the screen. The menu can be set to two sizes
depending on how far down you drag your finger.
To close the menu, simply swipe it back upwards to the top of the screen.

The pull-down menu contains the following controls when pulled
partway down:
Tap the Global Automation button to toggle between Read and
Write. To disable global automation entirely, hold Shift and tap this
button.
Tap the Loop button to toggle the arrangement loop on or off.
Use the Momentary button to set the behavior of a macro control.
See Macros for more information.
Use the Learn button to learn a parameter to a macro control. See
Macros for more information.

When the pull-down menu is fully opened, the following additional
controls are available:
Tap the Project field to open the Project window, where you can
load and save projects.
Tap the Bars:Beats:Ticks field to open the Locate window.
Tap the BPM field to open the Tempo window, where you can
adjust the tempo of the project.
The Memory and CPU meters monitor Force's system resources.
Tap the I/O icons to open the MIDI monitor.
Tap the Retrospective Record button to capture recently played
MIDI input and add it to the selected clip or arrangement.
Tap the Time Division button to open the Timing Correct window.
Tap the MIDI Rec Erase button to enable or disable MIDI record
erasing in Arrange Mode. When enabled, recording MIDI events will
replace any existing events in the arrangement. When disabled,
recording MIDI events will overdub on any existing events in the
arrangement.


---

## Page 85

85

Timing Correct (TC)

The Timing Correct window contains various settings to help quantize the events in your project. You can quantize note
events on MIDI tracks or track regions on audio tracks (though you cannot apply all types of quantization to audio tracks).
To open the Timing Correct settings:
Press and hold Shift, and then press and hold the track 6 Track Assign button.
In Arrange Mode, Clip Edit Mode, List Edit Mode, or Step Sequencer Mode, tap TC at the bottom of the
screen.
To enable or disable global timing correct, tap the Global Timing Correct button so it is on. Alternatively, press
and hold Shift and press the track 6 Track Assign button.
To apply the settings you selected, tap Do It.
To cancel and return to the previous screen, tap Close.

Use the Type selector to set how timing corrections are applied.
•
Start: The entire note event or audio track region will be nudged forward or backward so the start point aligns
with the closest time division marker in the grid. You can apply this to MIDI tracks or audio tracks.
•
End: The end points of note events will be extended or shortened to align with the closest time division marker in
the grid. The start points will remain untouched. You can apply this to MIDI tracks only.
•
Length: The end points of note events will be extended or shortened so that each event’s length is a multiple of
the time division, regardless of where it is in the grid. The start points will remain untouched. You can apply this
to MIDI tracks only.
•
Legato: The end points of note events will be extended or shortened to create a long, unbroken phrase from the
first note event’s start point to the last note event’s end point. Each note event will sustain until another note event
starts. If multiple note events start at the same time (and are not the last note events), their lengths will become
identical. Selecting Legato disables all other options in this window. You can apply this to MIDI tracks only.

Without legato applied.
With legato applied.


---

## Page 86

86

Use the Time Division selector to set the quantization value. Events will “snap” to these time divisions on the grid. The T
indicates a triplet-based value.

Use the Swing field to set the amount of swing from 50% to 75%. Swing lets you “shuffle” your beats—from subtle to
extreme.

Use the Shift Timing field to shift all events by clock ticks.

Use the Window field to set how many events around a quantize value will be quantized. Any events outside this range
will not be quantized; events inside will.

Use the Strength field to set how strictly events will be quantized (i.e., shifted toward the quantize value). Lower values
move events a little bit towards the closest quantize value, resulting in a less mechanical feel than a strict quantization (a
higher value).

Use the Events selector to set the target range for the time correction.
You can apply the time correction to All note events or to just the
Selected ones.
To select note events to which to apply time correction, either use the
various tools in Event View or Region View or press the pad with the
desired events (while Hitting Pad Selects All Events is set to On). You
must do this before opening the Timing Correct window.
When Range is selected, you can define the locations (From and To) as
well as the pads or keys that will be quantized.


---

## Page 87

87

Metronome (Click/Metro)

The Click/Metro window contains all settings regarding the metronome (click track).

To enable or disable the metronome, press and hold Shift and press the track 5 Track Assign button.
To open the metronome settings, press and hold Shift and then press and hold the track 5 Track Assign button.

Use the Count-In field to set if/when the metronome counts before recording.
•
Off disables the metronome pre-count.
•
Record enables the pre-count during recording only.
•
Record + Play enables pre-count in both Record and Playback Modes.

Use the Enable field to set if/when the metronome is enabled.
•
Off disables the metronome.
•
Play enables the metronome sound during playback only.
•
Record enables the metronome sound during recording only.
•
Record + Play enables the metronome to happen in both Record and Playback Modes.

Use the Rate field to select the metronome click’s time division: 1/4, 1/4T, 1/8, 1/8T, 1/16, 1/16T, 1/32 or 1/32T.
T indicates a triplet-based time division.

Use the Sound field to select the sound that you want to hear for the metronome: Sidestick 1, Sidestick 2, Clap,
Metroclick, Shake, Tambourine, or Force Click.

Use the Volume knob to set the volume of your metronome click.

Tap the On/Off button to enable or disable the metronome.

Use the Output field to set which pair of outputs will play the metronome click: Out 1,2, Out 3,4 or an individual Out
1–4.


---

## Page 88

88

Automation

You can set the global automation setting, or individual tracks' automation settings, to be “written,” “read,” or disabled
entirely by using the automation buttons in the pull-down project menu and the channel strip in the Mixer.

Global

In the pull-down project menu, you can enable When you tap this button to change its state, it will change the automation
state for all tracks in the project.
Tap the global automation button to cycle through its two states:
When set to Read (R), automation data will be read but not recorded. (Think of this as a protective
feature to prevent accidental changes to your automation while recording.)
When set to Write (W), automation can be recorded and will overwrite any existing automation.
(Make sure not to touch the XY pad accidentally while you are recording.)
Press and hold Shift and tap the global automation button to disable global automation. When off,
automation data will be ignored. Tap the global automation button again to enable global automation.
Important: If you have already recorded automation and turn it off, the track will still use the effect and
its parameter values at the point where you turned it off.

Tracks

In addition to global automation, you can set automation for individual tracks by using the track automation button in the
channel strip in the Mixer.
Note: Remember that tapping the global automation button will change the automation state for all tracks in the project;
if they were originally different, all of them will then match the global automation state.

Tap the track automation button to cycle through its two states:
When set to Read (R), the track will read automation data but will not record any additional automation
over it. (Think of this as a protective feature to prevent accidental changes to your automation while
recording.)
When set to Write (W), the track can record automation. (If you have any Q-Link knobs assigned to
automatable parameters, make sure not to touch any accidentally while you are recording.)
Press and hold Shift and tap the track automation button to disable track automation. When off, the
track will ignore automation data. If you have already recorded or entered automation, tapping this will
switch between Read (R) and Write (W) only, but you can override this and turn it off by pressing and
holding Shift while pressing or tapping the button.
Important: If you have already recorded automation and turn it off, the track will still use the effect and its
parameter values at the point where you turned it off.

To quickly clear automation from a track:
1. Make sure the track is selected by pressing and holding its Track Select button.
2. Hold Shift and press the Track 4 Track Assign button, with Clear Automation written underneath.
3. All automation on the track will be immediately removed.
Alternatively, you can delete individual automation events using List View in Clip Edit Mode.


---

## Page 89

89

Arpeggiator

Force includes a full-featured arpeggiator and phrase player for melodic track types, as well as traditional note repeat
functionality.

To enable the arpeggiator, press the Arp button.
To configure the arpeggiator setting, hold Shift and press the Arp button to open the Arpeggiator window.

The Setup section of the Arpeggiator window sets what kind of arpeggiator will be used and its basic functions.

Use the Action field to set the type: Arp, Note Repeat, Rhythm and Pattern. See below for more details about these
types and their additional parameters.

Use the Time Division selector to set the note value of each arpeggiator step from 1/1–1/64 beats, including T (triplet)
variations. This parameter is not available when Action is set to Pattern.
Note: This setting is tied to the project's Time Division setting, and will not function if Time Division has been set to
Off.

Use the Note Length slider to set the length of the played note in each step, from 1–100%.

Use the Velocity field to set the velocity of the arpeggiator notes. Choose As played, From first note, Accented,
Full, 3/4, Half or 1/4.

Use the Swing field to set the amount of swing in the arpeggiator from 50% to 75%. Swing lets you "shuffle" your
beats—from subtle to extreme.


---

## Page 90

90

The Arp mode section of the Arpeggiator window is available when the
Action is set to Arp. When this action is selected, hold down a chord
and the arpeggiator will play a pattern based on the notes held.
Use the Pattern field to set how the arpeggiator triggers the held
notes.
Use the Octaves field to set how many octaves of the held notes
the arpeggiator will cycle through.
Use the Variation field to apply rhythmic variation to the set pattern.

The Rhythm section of the Arpeggiator window is available when
Action is set to Note Repeat or Rhythm. The Note Repeat action
provides traditional MPC Note Repeat behavior. When the Rhythm
arpeggiator action is selected, hold down a chord and the arpeggiator
will play the held notes in a rhythmic pattern.
Use the Spread field to spread the timing of the held notes, creating
a glissando effect.
Use the Rhythm Pattern field to choose the pattern played when
notes are held. This is only available for the Rhythm action.

The Pattern section of the Arpeggiator window is available when the
Action is set to Pattern. When this arpeggiator action is selected, hold
down a single note to trigger a melodic phrase. As you change what
note is held, the melodic phrase will be transposed.
Use the Pattern field to choose the pattern.

The Settings section of the Arpeggiator window offers additional
options to control the arpeggiator.
If you have a sustain pedal connected, you can enable Sustain
Pedal Latches to use it to control latching.
Use the Latch Mode setting to set the action of the sustain pedal,
either Reset or Add.
