# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 91-105)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 91

91

Effects

You can apply various effects to the pads, keygroups, tracks, main outputs and submixes, using insert and send/return
effects. This chapter can help you get a good overall understanding of how the effects work.

See Appendix > Effects & Parameters for a list of all available effects (with a brief description of each) and their editable
parameters.

Overview

In a track, each pad or keygroup can have up to four insert effects applied to it. See Insert Effects > Pads or Keygroups
to learn more about this.

An entire track can also have up to four insert effects applied to it, as well. See Insert Effects > Tracks to learn more
about this.

Additionally, each pad, keygroup, and track can each be sent to (up to) four return channels, each of which can have
up to four insert effects of their own. Their audio will be routed through the insert effects on those returns, and the
processed audio will be sent to a main output. See Send/Return Effects to learn more about this.

Finally, you can apply up to four insert effects to each main output (a stereo pair of channels: Outputs 1/2 or Outputs
3/4) and submix. See Insert Effects > Main Outputs or Submixes to learn more about this.

There are three other modes that handle effects differently:
•
The Sampler can use up to four insert effects, which are applied to the audio as you record it. This means that
the effects cannot be “removed” from the sound later. Learn more about the Sampler in the Modes > Sampler
chapter.
•
Similarly, the Looper can use up to four insert effects, which are applied to the audio as you record it. This
means that the effects cannot be “removed” from the sound later. Learn more about the Looper in the Modes >
Looper chapter.
•
In XYFX Mode, the effects act like a single insert effect on that track. In fact, XYFX is the name of the insert effect
you have to load to the track before you can use this mode. Learn more about XYFX Mode in the Modes > XYFX
Mode chapter.


---

## Page 92

92

To view, load, edit, or clear effects, tap the Inserts button. This
usually appears in a channel strip (next to a level slider and pan knob).
To view and edit an effect, tap the effect name below the Inserts
button.

When viewing loaded effects, you will see this window:
To select an effect, use the field for each insert slot. A window
(described below) will appear.
To rearrange an insert effect, tap the arrows next to the insert slot
to move the selected effect up or down.
To edit the parameters of a loaded effect, tap the pencil icon
next to the insert slot.
To clear the insert slot, tap the trash can icon next to it.
To enable or disable an effect slot, tap the On/Off button next to
it.
To disable all four effect slots, tap the All On/All Off button in the
upper-right corner. Tap it again to reactivate the previously active
effects.
To load a factory FX rack, tap the Akai folder icon. Select the
desired FX rack from the options and all associated effects will be
added to the insert slots.
To load a user FX rack, tap the middle folder icon.
To save an FX rack, tap the Save disk icon.

When selecting an effect, you will see this window:
To move through the list, swipe up or down. Alternatively, use the
data dial or –/+ buttons.
To sort or unsort the effects by type or manufacturer, tap Type or
Manufacturer in the lower-left corner.
To load an effect, double-tap it. Alternatively, tap Select or the
data dial.
To cancel, tap Close or anywhere outside the list.

When you edit an effect, you will see this window:
To adjust a parameter, tap and drag its control. Alternatively, use
the data dial or –/+ buttons. To make finer adjustments, doubletap the control and adjust the larger version of it that appears.
Tip: Set the Knobs to screen mode to quickly adjust the
corresponding parameters.
To select another page of parameters, tap tabs at the bottom of
the screen.
To remove the effect from the insert slot, tap the trash can icon.
To enable or disable the effect, tap the On/Off button in the
upper-right corner.
To load an effect preset, tap the Folder icon.
To save an effect preset, tap the Save disk icon.
To edit parameters for another insert effect on the same pad,
track, etc., tap the Insert -/+ buttons at the top of the screen.
To close the window, tap Close or the upper part of the screen.


---

## Page 93

93

Insert Effects

Pads
You can load up to four insert effects to each pad. You can do this in the Pad Mixer or Track Edit Mode.
Tip: When using pad insert effects, they will be applied to the selected pad only. This means that you could apply unique
combinations of effects to each pad within a kit. If you want to apply the same effect to all pads, do this with a track insert
effect (see Insert Effects > Tracks).

To load a pad insert effect in the Pad Mixer:
1. Tap the Effects tab at the bottom of the screen.
2. Press the desired pad to select it, or tap it on the screen. Swipe your finger to the left to scroll through the banks of
pads.
3. Tap an insert slot to open the effects window and use it to load or edit effects.

To load a pad insert effect in Track Edit Mode:
1. While using the desired track, press the desired pad to select it.
2. Tap the Effects tab in the lower-right corner, and use it to load or edit effects.


---

## Page 94

94

Keygroups
You can load up to four insert effects to each keygroup. You can do this in the Pad Mixer or Track Edit Mode.
Important: When using keygroup insert effects, they will be applied to that keygroup only. Keep this in mind if you load
insert effects to multiple keygroups with overlapping note ranges—the effects will overlap in that range as well.

To load a keygroup insert effect in the Pad Mixer:
1. Tap the Effects tab at the bottom of the screen.
2. Tap an insert slot to open the effects window and use it to load or edit effects.

To load a keygroup insert effect in Track Edit Mode, tap the Effects tab at the bottom of the screen and then use the
screen that appears to load or edit effects.
Important: Remember that the effect will be applied to that keygroup only.


---

## Page 95

95

Tracks
You can load up to four insert effects to each track. You can do this in the Mixer or XYFX Mode.
Note: In XYFX Mode, the effects act like a single insert effect on that track. In fact, XYFX is the name of the insert effect
that is loaded when use this mode.

To load a track insert effect in the Mixer:
1. Tap the Effects tab at the bottom of the screen.
2. Tap an insert slot to open the effects window and use it to load or edit effects.

To load XYFX for a track in XYFX Mode:
1. Select the desired track in another mode, and then enter XYFX Mode.
2. If you have not yet used XYFX Mode for this track, tap Insert XYFX on the screen to load it and show the XY pad.
Note: If you already have four insert effects loaded, you will need to clear one of the insert effect slots before doing
this.
If you have already used XYFX Mode for this track, the XY pad will appear.
3. Tap XYFX Location in the upper-left corner, and select Track.
4. If the Setup panel is not shown, tap Setup in the lower-right corner to show it.
5. Use the Preset field to load an effect. Use the controls below the Preset field to edit the effect.


---

## Page 96

96

Main Outputs
You can load up to four insert effects to each main output (a stereo pair of channels: Outputs 1/2 or Outputs 3/4). You
can do this in the Mixer.

To load a main output insert effect in the Mixer:
1. Press the Master button to show the Returns and Main Outputs in the Mixer.
2. Tap the Effects tab at the bottom of the screen.
3. Tap an insert slot to open the effects window and use it to load or edit effects.

Submixes
You can load up to four insert effects to each Submix 1–8. You can do this in the Mixer.

To load a submix insert effect in the Mixer:
1. Press the Master button to show the Returns and Main Outputs in the Mixer.
2. Swipe to the right to show the Submixes to the left of the Returns.
3. Tap the Effects tab at the bottom of the screen.
4. Tap an insert slot to open the effects window and use it to load or edit effects.


---

## Page 97

97

Send/Return Effects

Send/return effects work in the following way:
1. A pad or drum, keygroup, plugin or audio track sends its audio to a return at a designated send level.
2. That audio is processed by the effects on the return. Each return can have up to four insert effects loaded and
activated.
3. The processed audio is sent to a pair of main outputs (stereo) or a single main output (mono).

You can load send/return effects and set return levels only in the Track Mixer, described below. The rest of this section
describes the different ways to set the desired send levels for pads or tracks.

To load a send/return effect to a return:
1. In the Mixer, press the Master button on the hardware to show the Returns and Main Outputs.
2. Tap the Effects tab at the bottom of the screen.
3. Tap an insert slot to open the effects window and use it to load or edit effects.

To set the return level:
1. In the Mixer, press the Master button on the hardware to show the Returns and Main Outputs.
2. Tap the Volume or Pan & Volume tab in the lower-left corner.
3. In the screen, tap the track that corresponds to the desired return.
4. To adjust the level of the currently selected return, use the data dial or –/+ buttons. Alternatively, use the level
slider in the channel strip. To make finer adjustments, double-tap the track on the screen and adjust the larger
version of the slider that appears.


---

## Page 98

98

Pads
You can set the send levels for individual pads in Track Edit Mode or the Pad Mixer.

To set the send levels for a pad in Track Edit Mode:
1. While editing the desired clip in Track Edit Mode, press the desired clip launch pad to select it.
2. Tap the Effects tab in the lower-right corner.
3. Use the Send knobs to set the send level for each return.

To set the send levels for a pad in the Pad Mixer:
1. Tap the Sends tab at the bottom of the screen.
2. Press the desired pad to select it, or tap it on the screen.
3. To set the send level, use the data dial or –/+ buttons. To make finer adjustments, double-tap the knob on the
screen and adjust the larger version of the knob that appears.


---

## Page 99

99

Keygroups
You can set the send levels for keygroups in Track Edit Mode or the Pad Mixer.

To set the send levels for a keygroup in Track Edit Mode:
1. While using the desired track, press the desired pad to select its keygroup. Alternatively, use the Keygroup field at
the top of the screen.
2. Tap the Effects tab in the lower-right corner.
3. Use the Send knobs to set the send level for each return.

To set the send levels for a keygroup in the Pad Mixer:
1. Tap the Sends tab at the bottom of the screen.
2. Press the desired pad to select its corresponding keygroup, or tap it on the screen.
3. To set the send level, use the data dial or –/+ buttons. To make finer adjustments, double-tap the pad on the
screen and adjust the larger version of the knob that appears.


---

## Page 100

100

Audio and Plugin Tracks
You can set the send levels for audio and plugin tracks in the Mixer only.

To set the send levels for an audio or plugin track:
1. Tap the Sends tab at the bottom of the screen.
2. In the screen, tap the send knob in the desired track.
3. To set the send level, use the data dial or –/+ buttons. To make finer adjustments, double-tap the pad on the
screen and adjust the larger version of the knob that appears.


---

## Page 101

101

Plugins

Force includes a number of plugins from AIR Music Technology to help you get started making music right out of the box.

To learn more about plugin tracks, see Operation > General Features > Tracks > Plugin Tracks.

Bassline

The AIR Bassline plugin emulates the sound of classic mono synths,
with a contemporary twist.

Osc / Filter / Envelope
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the oscillators, as well as their
filter and envelope settings.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Oscillator
Waveform
Continuously variable waveshape for the oscillator. Saw Octave, Saw, Square, Sine

Sub-Octave
Amount of sub-octave oscillator.
0–100%

Fifth
Amount of fifth-oscillator.
0–100%

Start Phase
Position of the waveform when a note is triggered. Free, 0 degr., 180 degr.

Glide Time
Amount of time to slide from the pitch of one note
to the next note played.
10.0 ms – 2.00 s

Boost
Boosts the signal of the oscillator.
0.0 dB – 48.0 dB

Boost Freq.
Center frequency of the boost.
* 1.0 – * 240.0

Boost Envelope Amount of effect of the envelope on the Boost
section.
Adjust Gain to control the amount of boost.
Adjust Frequency to control the width of the
boosted frequency.
Gain 100–0%, Off, Frequency
0–100%
Filter
LP Cutoff
Cutoff frequency for the low-pass filter.
20.0 Hz – 20.0 kHz

Reso
Resonance of the filter.
0–100%

Filter Env
Envelope of the filter.
At negative values, decreases the cutoff value
based on the filter decay value.
At positive values, increases the cutoff value
based on the filter decay value.
-100% – 0 – 100%

HP Cutoff
Cutoff frequency for the high-pass filter.
10.0 Hz – 500 Hz
Envelope
Amp Attack
Length of time for the note to reach full volume.
100–0% Soft to 0–100% Hard

Amp Decay
Length of time for the note to reach the sustained
volume.
0–100%

Filter Decay
Length of time for the filter to reset after being
released.
0–100%

Pitch Mod
Amount of pitch modulation applied to the
envelope.
0–100%


---

## Page 102

102

Velocity / Global / Chorus
Use this tab to adjust the Velocity Control settings, and Global volume. You can also apply and adjust the settings for the
built-in Chorus effect.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Velocity
Amp Control
The amount of effect velocity has on amplitude
control.
0–100%

Filter Control
The amount of effect velocity has on filter control.
0–100%

Boost Control
The amount of effect velocity has on boost control.
0–100%

Env Retrigger
Sets whether the envelope will retrigger when a note is
played while another note is being held.
Off, On
Global
Global Volume
Sets the volume level.
-inf dB – +6.0 dB

Drive Type
Choose one of two drive algorithms.
Overdrive, Clip

Drive Amount
Amount of drive applied.
0–100%

Bend Range
Number of semitones up or down controlled by MIDI
pitch bend messages
0–12
Chorus
Rate
Modulation speed of the chorus effect.
0.40 Hz – 3.20 kHz

Depth
Modulation depth of the chorus effect.
0–100%

Mix
Wet/dry amount of the chorus effect.
0–100%

On/Off
Enables or disables the effect.
Off, On

Delay
Use this tab to apply and adjust the settings for the built-in delay effect.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Time
Length of time of the delayed signal.

When Sync is set to Free: 1 ms – 2.00 s

When Sync is set to Sync: 1/32 – 8/4
Sync
Set to Free to adjust Time by milliseconds, or set to Sync to match the
Delay Time to the Global Tempo.
Free, Sync
Mix
Wet/dry amount of the delay effect.
0–100%
Feedback
Amount of signal fed back into the delay line.
0–100%
Damp
Center frequency of where the delay signal will be dampened.
1.00 – 20.0 kHz
Reso
Amount of resonance of the feedback signal.
0–100%
Reso Freq
Center frequency for feedback resonance.
100 Hz – 10.0 kHz
Ratio
Reduces the delay Time in either the Left or Right stereo field. This is
useful for creating offset, panned delays.
L 50:100, R 50:100
HPF
Center frequency for delay signal high-pass filter.
20.0 Hz – 1.0 kHz
Width
Stereo width of delay signal. Higher values give wider stereo separation.
0–100%
On/Off
Enables or disables the effect.
Off, On


---

## Page 103

103

Compressor / Hype
Use this tab to apply and adjust the settings for the built-in Compressor and Hype effects.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Compressor
Threshold
Signal level after which the compressor will be applied. 0.0 – -60. dB

Ratio
Amount of compression applied.
1.0:1 – 100.0:1

Output
Amount of additional output gain for the compressed
signal.
0.0 – +30.0 dB

Mix
Wet/dry mix of the compressor effect.
0–100%

Knee
How gradually the compressor reacts as the threshold
is reached.
Lower values apply a "soft" knee (compression is
applied more slowly as signal approaches the
threshold), and higher values apply a "hard" knee
(compression is immediately applied when the
threshold is reached).
0–100%

Attack
Length of time to apply the compression.
100 us – 300 ms

Release
Length of time for compressed signal to return to
original level.
10 ms – 4.00 s

On/Off
Enables or disables the effect.
Off, On
Hype
High
Dampens or maximizes high end frequencies.
-100 – 0 – +100%

Low
Dampens or maximizes low end frequencies.
-100 – 0 – +100%

On/Off
Enables or disables the effect.
Off, On


---

## Page 104

104

Electric

The AIR Electric plugin emulates the sound of classic electric pianos.
While viewing any of the tabs listed below, you can quickly enable or
disable the Bell and Noise sounds, as well as the built-in effects
(Tremolo, Tube, Chorus, Delay and Spring Reverb).
When viewing a specific tab, you can enable or disable the sound or
effect by pressing the circle in the upper-right corner of each section.

Pickup / Env
Use this tab to edit the settings for the emulated pickup and the sound
envelope.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Pickup
Type
Type of pickup emulated.
Pickup, 0–100%
Electro-Static, 0–100%
Electro-Magnetic

Height
Height of the pickup to the tines.
0.0 – 5.0 mm

Distance
Distance of the pickup to the tines.
0.1 – 10.0 mm

Clip
Amount of clipping applied to the signal.
0–100%

Keytrack
Ties the pickup parameters to the pitch being played.
At higher values, the Distance is increased as the pitch is
increased.
0–100%
Envelope
Attack
Length of time for the note to reach full volume.
100–0% Hard,
0–100% Soft

Decay
Length of time for the note to reach the sustained
volume.
100 ms – 20.0 s

Release
Length of time for the note to become silent after being
released.
100 ms – 5.0 s

Peak Length
Length of time full volume is held before decaying.
3 – 50 ms

Keytrack
Ties the envelope parameters to the pitch being played.
At higher values, the envelope time is decreased as the
pitch is increased.
0–100%


---

## Page 105

105

Bell / Noise
Use this tab to apply and adjust the settings for the Bell and Noise sounds.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Bell
Tune
Pitch of the bell sound, in semitones above the root
pitch.
0– 60 semitones

Dry/PU
Mix of Dry versus Pickup signal for the bell sound.
-100% – 0% – +100%

Volume
Level of the bell sound.
-inf dB – +6.0 dB

Tune Keytrack
Ties the tuning of the bell sound to the pitches played. 0–100%

Decay
How long it takes for the bell sound to dissipate
100 ms – 7.0 s

Keytrack
Ties the amount of bell sound to the pitch being
played.
At negative values, the bell sound is increased as the
pitch increases.
At positive values, the bell sound is increased as the
pitch decreases.
-100% – 0% – +100%
Noise
Freq
Center frequency of the noise effect
200 Hz – 16.0 kHz

Random
Amount of randomization applied to the noise effect
0–100%

Mix
Level of noise effect present
-inf dB – +6.0 dB

Attack
Length of time for the noise effect to reach full level
1–50 ms

Decay
Length of time for the noise effect to dissipate
100 ms – 3.00 s

Keytrack
Ties the Freq to the pitch being played.
0–100%

Setup
Use this tab to adjust general settings for the plugin.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Polyphony
Number of voices available.
1–16 Voices
Level
Overall level of the plugin.
-inf dB – +6.0 dB
Velo Level
Adjusts how much incoming velocity is applied.
0–100%
Velo Tone
Ties the incoming velocity to tone.
At higher values, increased velocity increases tone brightness.
0–100%
Velo Attack
Ties the incoming velocity to the attack envelope.
At higher values, low velocities feature longer attack times.
0–100%
