# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 241-255)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 241

241

The Silence process replaces the region between the start point and
end point with silence.

The Extract process deletes the regions before the start point and after
the end point and saves it as a new sample (with a name you enter) in
your current project.
Tip: This is useful if you recorded a drum loop and wanted to remove
just a snare drum hit, a kick drum hit, etc. to use separately in the
project.

The Normalize process increases a sample’s level to the highest level
possible without distortion. This is essentially a kind of digital gain
optimization, so you do not have to worry about excessive level settings
when working with samples with a wide range of amplitudes.

The Reverse process reverses the region between the start point and
end point.


---

## Page 242

242

The Fade In process sets a fade-in between the start point and end
point. The following types are available:
•
Linear fades the audio in with a linear curve—a straight line
between the start and end.
•
Log fades the audio in with a logarithmic curve—quickly rising at
the start and flattening out towards the end.
•
Exp fades the audio in with an exponential curve—slowly rising
in the beginning and growing steeper towards the end.

The Fade Out process sets a fade-out between the start point and end
point. The following types are available:
•
Linear fades the audio out with a linear curve—a straight line
between the start and end.
•
Log fades the audio out with a logarithmic curve—quickly
falling at the start and flattening out towards the end.
•
Exp fades the audio out with an exponential curve—
slowly falling in the beginning and growing steeper
towards the end.

The Pitch Shift process changes the pitch of the sample without
changing its length. This lets you set the sample’s pitch to your project
without affecting the sample’s tempo or duration. You can adjust it up
to 12 semitones, up or down. Keep in mind that the audio quality may
decrease at more extreme settings.

The Gain Change process raises or lowers the volume of the sample.
You can adjust it up to 18 dB, higher or lower. This function is different
than Normalize because it will allow volumes beyond clipping level. This
may be a desired effect, but remember to watch your output level!


---

## Page 243

243

Pad Mode

Pad Mode lets you edit a sample in the context of the track in which you’ll use it. You can adjust the pad parameters as
though you were in Track Edit Mode, auditioning and hearing how it will sound in the track’s audio path.

To enter Pad Mode, tap the Pad button at the bottom of the screen. The pads will show their assigned samples in the
current Program.

Use the Start and End fields to set the position of the start point and end point of the sample (respectively). Alternatively,
tap and drag the start (S) or end (E) marker left or right, or use Knobs 1 and 2 to adjust the start point or Knobs 3 and 4
to adjust the end point when the knobs are in screen mode.

Program Mode includes a loop function. When on, the region of the sample between the loop point and end point will repeat.
This is useful when trying to find an ideal spot to begin the sample. The loop cannot be earlier than the start point.

To adjust the loop point, do any of the following:
•
Use the Loop field.
•
Tap and drag the start (S) marker (if Loop Lock is on) or the loop marker (if Loop Lock is off).
•
When the knobs are in screen mode, use Knobs 5 and 6 to adjust the loop marker. Knob 5 provides fine
adjustment and Knob 6 provides coarse adjustment.

To turn Loop Lock on or off, tap the Loop Lock button. When on, the loop point is the same as the start point. When
off, the loop point is independent from the start point.

To turn the loop function on or off, tap the Loop button to cycle between the four modes:
Off: The sample will not loop.
Forward: When the loop reaches its end point, it will start playing again from the loop point.
Reverse: When the loop reaches its end point, it will play in reverse. When it reaches the loop point again, it will return
to the end point and continue playing in reverse.
Alternating: When the loop reaches its end point, it will play in reverse. When it reaches the loop point again, it will
start playing forward again from the loop point.
To switch between Forward and off, press and hold Shift, and then tap Loop at the bottom of the screen.

Tap each pad to hear its sample/samples. The sample on its first layer will automatically appear in the waveform display
for editing.


---

## Page 244

244

Use the Tune field to transpose the sample up or down from its original pitch.

Tap From BPM to open the Edit Tuning window, which lets you tune a sample to the current sequence.

Use the Number of Beats field to match the number of beats in the sequence.
To tune the sample to the project, tap Match. The Tune field will adjust automatically and close the window. The
sample is now tuned to the sequence.
To tune the sample to the project and adjust the project tempo, tap To Project. This is the same as tapping Match
but it also changes the project's tempo to the BPM shown in the Tempo field on the right.
To close the window, tap Close.

Use the Root Note field to set the root note of the sample. This defines which note will play the sample at its original pitch
when in a keygroup track.

Use the Slice field to display either the sample as it has been edited (Pad) or the entire sample (All).
If the Slice field is set to All, you can display the sample as it has been edited but keep the start point and end point. To
do this, press and hold Shift, and then tap To Pad at the bottom of the screen. The Slice field will change to Pad, but
the start point and end point will remain in their current locations.


---

## Page 245

245

The Link Slices button does not have a function in Pad Mode.

0 Snap forces start points, end points, and loop points to occur only at the waveform’s “zero-crossings.” This can help
to avoid clicks and glitches when playing a sample.
To enable or disable 0 Snap, press and hold Shift, and then tap 0 Snap at the bottom of the screen.

To enable or disable the loop function, press and hold Shift, and then tap Loop at the bottom of the screen. This
switches the loop function between Forward and off. The loop function is described earlier.


---

## Page 246

246

Assigning Samples

You can assign your new sample directly to a pad from Pad Mode.
To assign a sample, tap Assign at the bottom of the screen to open the Assign Sample window.
Important: Assigning a sample to a pad in this way will replace the sample on the first layer of the pad.

If you set the Assign To field to Assign slice to a pad, the pad
will simply refer to the slice in this sample instead of creating a
new sample. This is useful for reducing clutter in your project.

Use the Pad field to select the desired pad. Alternatively,
press the desired pad.

Use the Slice Type field to select how the pad’s layer settings
will be set when the slice is assigned to it (see Track Edit
Mode to learn more about the parameters mentioned below):
•
Non-Destructive Slice: The pad’s Slice setting will be
set to the slice number.
•
Pad Parameters: The pad’s Slice setting will be set to
Pad. The Pad Start and Pad End will be set to the
slice’s start point and end point values, and the Loop
Position will be set to the slice’s start point but with
Pad Loop deactivated.

Use the Program field to specify the program to which you
want to add the slice.

To assign the sample, tap Do It.
To cancel the operation, tap Close.

If you set the Assign To field to Make new sample, this will
create a new sample in your project. (The original sample will
remain as it is.)

Use the Pad field to select the desired pad. Alternatively,
press the desired pad.

Check the Crop Sample box to delete the unused parts
from the sample when it’s created and assigned. This
feature is destructive, though the project will still contain
your original sample.
Leave this box unchecked to keep the unused parts of the
sample when it is created and assigned. This way, you will
still be able to edit the entire sample further even though you
are using only part of it at the moment.

Use the Program field to specify the program to which you
want to add the slice.

To assign the sample, tap Do It.
To cancel the operation, tap Close.


---

## Page 247

247

Processing Slices & Samples

Tap the Process button to open the Process window, where you can select an editing option for the sample.

Use the Function field to select an editing process. Double-tap it or tap Function at the bottom of the screen to open the
Function window, which displays an overview of all available editing processes.

You can use any of these functions as described below.
To return to Sample Edit Mode, tap Cancel.
To return to the Process window, tap the top of the screen.
Note: All Slice processes will affect only the part of the sample between the start point and the end point. The Sample
processes (Bit Reduce and Stereo -> Mono) will affect the entire sample regardless of its start point or end point.

The Discard process deletes the regions before the start point and after
the end point.

The Delete process deletes the region between the start point and end
point and closes the gap between them.


---

## Page 248

248

The Silence process replaces the region between the start point and
end point with silence.

The Extract process deletes the regions before the start point and after
the end point and saves it as a new sample in your current project.
Use the Edit Name field (and the virtual keyboard that appears) to
name the new sample.
Tip: This is useful if you recorded a drum loop and wanted to remove
just a snare drum hit, a kick drum hit, etc. to use separately in the
project.

The Normalize process increases a sample’s level to the highest level
possible without distortion. This is essentially a kind of digital gain
optimization, so you do not have to worry about excessive level settings
when working with samples with a wide range of amplitudes.

The Reverse process reverses the region between the start point and
end point.


---

## Page 249

249

The Fade In process sets a fade-in between the start point and end
point. The following types are available:
•
Linear fades the audio in with a linear curve—a straight line
between the start and end.
•
Log fades the audio in with a logarithmic curve—quickly rising at
the start and flattening out towards the end.
•
Exp fades the audio in with an exponential curve—slowly rising
in the beginning and growing steeper towards the end.

The Fade Out process sets a fade-out between the start point
and end point. The following types are available:
•
Linear fades the audio out with a linear curve—a straight line
between the start and end.
•
Log fades the audio out with a logarithmic curve—quickly
falling at the start and flattening out towards the end.
•
Exp fades the audio out with an exponential curve—slowly
falling in the beginning and growing steeper towards the end.

The Pitch Shift process changes the pitch of the sample without
changing its length. This lets you set the sample’s pitch to your project
without affecting the sample’s tempo or duration. You can adjust it up
to 12 semitones, up or down. Keep in mind that the audio quality may
decrease at more extreme settings.

The Time Stretch process lengthens or shortens the sample without
changing its pitch. This is useful for matching the durations of two
samples with different pitches. You can enter the original tempo of the
sample and the desired tempo after processing.
Use the Beat field to set the desired value number of beats.
Use the New Tempo field to set the new tempo. The Ratio field will
then automatically show the time stretch factor.
Alternatively, to adjust the ratio instead, use the Ratio field to set
the desired ratio. The New Tempo field will then change
automatically based on the new time stretch factor.


---

## Page 250

250

The Gain Change process raises or lowers the volume of the sample.
You can adjust it up to 18 dB, higher or lower. This function is different
than Normalize because it will allow volumes beyond clipping level. This
may be a desired effect, but remember to watch your output level!

The Copy process saves a copy of the sample.
Use the Edit Name field (and the virtual keyboard that appears) to
name the new sample. Otherwise, the process will add a consecutive
number after the sample name.

The Bit Reduce process lowers the bit resolution of a sample,
effectively reducing its degree of faithful reproduction. You can reduce
it down to 1 bit. (The sound is similar to the Resampler effect, but Bit
Reduce will permanently alter the sample.)
Tip: Use this on drum loops to get a dirty, “old-school” sizzle but with
a digital “edge.”
Note: This process affects the entire sample regardless of its start
point or end point.

The Stereo -> Mono process converts a stereo sample to a new mono
sample and saves it as a new sample.
Use the Edit Name field (and the virtual keyboard that appears) to
name the new sample. Otherwise, the process will add a consecutive
number after the sample name.
The following options are available:
•
Left will convert the left channel only.
•
Right will convert the right channel only.
•
Sum will combine the left and right audio channels to a
single mono channel.
Note: This process affects the entire sample regardless of its start
point or end point.


---

## Page 251

251

Sampler

The Sampler lets you record audio samples to use in your projects.

To open the Sampler, press Menu and then tap Sampler.

To set up the Sampler before recording:
1. Make sure to reduce the volume levels of your audio source and speakers, headphones, and/or monitors before you
make any connections to avoid “pops” or feedback.
2. Connect your audio source to the input/inputs of your Force hardware.
For line-level devices such as a synthesizer, set the Line/Inst switch to Line; for instrument-level devices such as a
guitar, set the switch to Inst.
If you are using a microphone that requires phantom power, set the +48V switch to On.
3. Turn the Gain knob to set the input level while playing your audio source. You should now see the level in the meter.
Make sure it does not exceed the maximum level (the meter should not be “peaking” constantly).
4. Set the recording controls as desired (described in this chapter).
5. Tap the Arm button to record-arm the Sampler.


---

## Page 252

252

The upper-left Input Source field defines whether you are going to record an external audio
signal, which you can set to the pair of inputs (Input 1,2) or a single input (Input 1–2). You
can also select an internal signal from within your Force hardware (Resample L, Resample
R, or Resample L+R).
Resampling does not require an audio connection because the source is internal and is
therefore recorded without any loss in audio quality. You can, for example, use Resample to
record two or more samples by pressing the corresponding pads simultaneously.

Use the second upper-left Mono/Stereo field to choose whether your recorded samples will
be monaural (Mono) or binaural (Stereo).

The Inserts field shows any enabled or disabled effects for the Sampler. Tap the area under
Inserts to open a window where you can load, change, and enable or disable the effects.
Important: These effects are applied to the audio as you record it. This means that the
effects cannot be “removed” from the sound later. Learn more about how effects work in
General Features > Effects.

Tap the Monitor button to enable or disable input monitoring. When on, the audio you hear
in your headphones will be taken before it reaches the Sampler, ensuring zero latency. When
off, the audio you hear in your headphones will be taken after it is processed in the Sampler,
so there may be some latency, but you will hear the audio source as it sounds in the
recording.
Tip: To avoid possible clicks or feedback while input monitoring, reduce the level of the
audio sources.

Use the threshold slider to adjust the threshold. Alternatively, turn Knob 1 when the knobs
are set to screen mode.
When the Sampler is record-armed, it automatically starts recording when the level of the
incoming source exceeds this setting. If you set it too high, the recording may not start when
you play the input source, or the start of the material you wanted to record may be missing.
If you set it too low, the recording may start too early, before you play the external source.
Set this parameter to an appropriate level using the level meter.
To reset the “peak hold,” which shows the highest level of your input signal in the level
meter, tap it.


---

## Page 253

253

For reference, the Sample Length counter shows you the length of your sample during the
recording procedure.

Tap Arm to record-arm the Sampler. The button will then change to Record and show
Waiting for signal.
At that point, start recording by doing either of the following:
•
Start performing so that the incoming audio level exceeds the level of the threshold
slider.
•
Tap Record under the Sample Length counter.
To disarm the track instead, tap Cancel.

Use the Max Length field to define the maximum sampling time.
You can record up to 15 minutes and 59 seconds (15:59) per sample. We recommend setting
these to values that roughly match your estimated recording duration. The default value is
20 seconds.


---

## Page 254

254

After you stop your recording, the Keep or Discard Sample window will appear.

Use the New Sample field to name the new sample. Tap it and use the virtual keyboard that appears.

Use the Track field to assign the new sample to a track. Select <none> if you want to save it to the project without
assigning it to a track.
Note: Newly recorded samples can only be assigned to Drum tracks.

Use the Assign to Pad field to assign the sample to a pad in the track.

Use the Root Note field to set where the sample’s original pitch will be on the keyboard.

To confirm your selections, tap Keep at the bottom of the screen.
To discard the recording and return to the Sampler, tap Discard at the bottom of the screen.
To play the recording, tap Play at the bottom of the screen.
To save the recording, tap Save at the bottom of the screen.
To edit the recording in Sample Edit Mode (recommended), tap Edit at the bottom of the screen. See Sample Edit
Mode for more information.


---

## Page 255

255

Auto Sampler

The Sampler page also contains the Auto Sampler, which lets you capture and covert any plugin preset or external
instrument preset into a keygroup sampler patch.

To open the auto sampler, tap the keyboard icon next to the record button in Sampler View. The current
track will be selected as the auto sample source.

Sample Source Information
Use the Track name field to select the target auto sampler source.
Use the Record from field to select an input to record from. Select
one of the Input options to auto sample an external instrument, or
select one of the Resample options to auto sample from an internal
source.

Note Range
Use the Min Note and Max Note fields to set the range of notes
that will be created.
Use the Note Stride field to set the number of semitones between
each new sample.
Check the Extend min/max notes box to sample all the way to the
lowest and highest notes, regardless of the Min Note and Max
Note settings.

Velocity
Tap the boxes next to Layers 1–4 to select how many layers will be
used to create the sampler patch.
Use the Velocity value sliders to set the velocity of each layer.

Sampling
Use the Note length slider to set the length of the sampled note in
seconds.
Use Tail slider to set the length of the Audio Tail in seconds. This
will add extra seconds to the end of the resulting audio file. This is
useful if you are capturing samples whose sounds exceed the
defined audio length (e.g., long reverb or delay, one-shot samples
with long decays, etc.). We recommend using an audio tail of at
least a couple of seconds.
Use Base name to set the naming convention for the samples that
will be created by the Auto Sampler.
