# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 181-195)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 181

181

Tap the keyboard+ icon at the top of the screen to quickly create a keygroup from the selected sample. The new keygroup
will be created on a new track and automatically be selected.

Tap the location icon at the top of the screen (on the right side) to open the Edit Zones window, which is a feature for
drum tracks. This window displays an overview of any selected pads. Use the Mode selector to set how the selected
pads will be edited:
•
Current: Only the currently selected pad can be edited.
•
Multiple: All selected pads can be edited simultaneously.
•
All: All pads can be edited simultaneously.

To close the window, tap Close, the X, or anywhere outside the window.


---

## Page 182

182

Tap the down-arrow icon at the top of the screen (next to the Track field) to open the Flatten Pad window, which renders
all samples on a pad as an audio sample and places it on the first layer of that pad. The resulting sample is the audio
signal produced by that pad at full velocity (127) after the pad channel strip, which means that it includes any assigned
pad insert effects and the results of warping the sample.
This function is useful if you need to reduce how CPU-intensive a pad or track is by essentially “embedding” the warping
and effects in the sample itself. By default, it will use the name of the first sample. This function works for drum tracks only.
To select the pad, press it or use the Pad menu.
To set the length of the audio tail, use the Audio Tail field. This will add extra seconds to the end of the resulting audio
file. This is useful if you are using effects or samples whose sounds exceed the defined audio length (e.g., long reverb or
delay, one-shot samples with long decays, etc.). We recommend using an audio tail of at least a couple of seconds.
To name the new sample, tap the Edit Name field, and use the virtual keyboard that appears.
To confirm your choice, tap Do It.
To cancel, tap Cancel.


---

## Page 183

183

Global
In the Global tab, you can set the playback mode and tuning for the overall Track.

Global Semi lets you transpose the track up to 36 semitones up or down.

Global Fine provides fine-tuning of the track up to 99 cents up or down.

Global Poly (Polyphony) sets the playback mode for the track’s pads. In Mono Mode, only one pad will sound at a time.
If a pad is played while another (or the same one) is still playing its sample/samples, the new pad will immediately mute
all other currently playing pads in that track. In Poly Mode, several pads can be triggered at the same time (limited only
by the total number of voices available).

Level controls the overall volume level of the loaded sample/samples.

Pan controls the overall panning of the loaded sample/samples in the stereo field.

Use the Mute Group field to assign the selected pad to one of the 32 available groups. When pads assigned to the same
mute group receive MIDI notes, the last pad played will silence all other pads in that mute group. A mute group affects
pads within that track only; mute groups do not affect pads in other tracks.
Tip: This feature is useful for programming realistic hi-hats, so only the open or closed hat is heard.

Use the Layer Play selector to determine how multiple samples assigned to the same pad are played:
•
Cycle (Cyc): Each time the pad is played, it will play the next layer’s sample. In other words, the samples will cycle
through the layers as follows: 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4… etc.
•
Velocity (Vel): The pad will switch between layers depending on how hard you press a pad.
•
Random (Ran): Each time the pad is played, it will play one of its layer’s samples at random.

Use the Sample Play selector to determine how much of the sample is played.
•
One Shot: The entire sample will play from start to end. Use this when you want to play short sounds.
•
Note Off: The entire sample will play from start to end after the pad has been pressed and released.
•
Note On: The sample will play only as long as the pad is held. This is better for longer samples so you can control
a sound’s duration by pressing and holding its corresponding pad.


---

## Page 184

184

Use the Pad Polyphony field to determine how the pad’s sound behaves when multiple hits are registered. When set to
Mono, only one pad will sound at a time. If a pad is played while another (or the same one) is still playing its
sample/samples, the new pad will immediately mute all other currently playing pads in that track. When set to Poly, several
pads can be triggered at the same time (limited only by the total number of voices available). You can also select a specific
number of pads (2–32) so that you can trigger up to this many pads at the same time (unless they exceed the total number
of voices available).

The Simultaneous Play section lets you set up to four pads that can be triggered by pressing one pad only. This function
is useful for triggering a stack of sounds (e.g., layered kick drums). Use each Pad field to select the desired pad.

The Mute Targets tab lets you select up to four pads (in the same track) for the currently selected pad. When the currently
selected pad is played, it will immediately silence its mute targets. Use each Pad field to select the desired mute target.
Tips:
This feature is useful for programming realistic hi-hats, especially if only the open or closed hat should be heard.
This feature is similar to the mute group feature, available for both drum tracks and keygroup tracks.


---

## Page 185

185

Samples
Each pad can trigger up to four samples, which are assigned in four individual layers. Each layer has identical,
independently assignable parameters.
Tap Samples to cycle through its four available tabs.

On all four sections, you can access the Settings window, which lets you configure certain settings in the Samples tab.
To view the Settings, tap the gear icon.
To close the Settings, tap Close, the X in the upper-right corner, or anywhere outside the window.

Use the Link Slices selector to set how the start point and end point of a slice in a larger sample is set. You can create
these slices in Sample Edit Mode (Chop Mode).
When on, changing the start point of a slice will also change the end point of the previous slice. Similarly, changing the
end point of a slice will also change the start point of the next slice. Disable Link Slices if you are trying to create slices
that use non-contiguous parts of the sample. This is the same as the Link Slices button in Sample Edit Mode.

Use the Loop Lock selector to “link” or “unlink” the loop point from the start point. When on, the loop point is the same
as the start point. When off, the loop point is independent from the start point and indicated by a separate loop marker.
This is the same as the Loop Lock button in Sample Edit Mode.

Use the Zero Snap selector to enable or disable the Zero Snap feature, which forces start points, end points, and loop
points to occur only at the waveform’s “zero-crossings.” This can help to avoid clicks and glitches when playing a sample.
This is the same as the 0 Snap button in Sample Edit Mode.


---

## Page 186

186

The first Samples tab contains the sample waveform for each layer and controls for its pitch, timing, and playback.

The upper half of the screen shows the waveform of the sample on the currently selected layer. The lower half shows the
editing controls.
The waveform display shows the “active” section of the sample waveform. Swipe left or right on the waveform to move
through it.
Above the waveform is the timeline, shown in bars, beats, and ticks.

Tap each layer number (Layer 1–4) under the waveform to select it. When selected, its sample waveform will be shown in
the upper half of the screen and its settings will be shown in the lower half.

Use the Sample field to select the sample file for that layer. Remember that the sample has to be loaded into the project’s
sample pool beforehand. For information on how to load samples into a project, please see the Browser chapter.

Important: The parameters in the Samples tabs work in conjunction with Chop Mode (in Sample Edit Mode). Here’s how
it works:
When working in Sample Edit Mode and using Chop Mode to divide a sample into slices for your pads, you can convert
a slice using Non-Destructive Slice or Pad Parameters.
A Non-Destructive Slice will let its pad to refer to that slice when you press it; the original sample remains intact and
each slice marker is like a “bookmark” for a pad. In Track Edit Mode, you’ll see that the pad/layer to which it’s assigned
has its Slice drop-down menu set to the corresponding slice number in the original sample. Playing that pad will cause
it to refer to that slice marker like a “bookmark” instead of creating an entirely new sample of that slice. This means that
you no longer have to clutter your project with a new sample for every slice (though you can still use this earlier method,
if you prefer).
A slice converted using Pad Parameters is very similar to a non-destructive slice described above. The difference is that
in Track Edit Mode, the pads/layers they’re assigned to have their Slice drop-down menus set to Pad (instead of the slice
number), and the start and end points will correspond to the slice markers in the original sample.


---

## Page 187

187

The green/S marker and red/E marker are the start point and end point (respectively). These two points define the region
of the sample that will be played.
To move the start point or end point, do any of the following:
•
Tap and drag the S or E marker left or right.
•
Use the Start or End fields shown below the waveform.
•
When the knobs are set to screen mode, use Knobs 1 and 5 to adjust the start point or Knobs 2 and 6 to adjust
the end point. Knobs 1 and 2 provide fine adjustment and Knobs 5 and 6 provide coarse adjustment.
Note: When Loop Lock is on, the loop position (as determined by the Loop field, if enabled) is the same as the sample’s
start point. When off, the loop position is independent from the start point.

Use the Loop field to determine the position where the sample’s playback will repeat when Pad Loop is activated.
Note: When Loop Lock is on, the loop position is the same as the sample’s start point. When off, the loop position is
independent from the start point.

Use the Tail Length and Tail Loop fields to add adding extra audio tail to any chopped sample. This is useful for things
like making an abrupt end to a sample sound more natural or adding experimental looping effects to a sample. The Tail
Length parameter enables the sample tail and set its total length, and the Tail Loop parameter sets the starting point
within the tail for looping.

Use the Slice field to select what part/parts of the sample will play:
•
All: The entire sample will play.
•
Pad: The sample will play from the Pad Start position to the Pad End position, described earlier. This also lets
you activate Pad Loop (if the Sample Play field in the LFO Modulation tab is set to Note On).
•
Slice 1, 2, 3, etc.: If you have sliced the sample in Chop Mode, you can select which slice will play when you
trigger the pad.

Semi lets you transpose the selected layer 36 up to semitones up or down. This will affect the length of the sample (if
Warp is off). This is the same as the Semi knob on the second Samples tab. The analyzed Key of the sample is displayed
next to the Semi field and will adjust based on this value.

Fine provides fine-tuning of each layer by cents. This will affect the length of the sample (if Warp is off). This is the same
as the Fine knob on the second Samples tab.


---

## Page 188

188

Use the Reverse button to select in which direction the sample will play. When on, the sample will play in reverse. When
off, the sample will play in the normal forward direction.

Use the Pad Loop button to cycle through the available Pad Loop modes.
Important: For Pad Loop to work, you must (1) set the Sample Play field (in the LFO Modulation tab) to Note On instead
of One Shot and (2) set the Slice field (in the first Samples tab) to Pad instead of All or a slice number.
•
Off: The sample will not loop.
•
Forward: You can hold down the pad to cause that sample to repeat from the Loop Position
to the end of the sample. Release the pad to stop the repeating playback.
•
Reverse: You can hold down the pad to cause that sample to play in reverse, repeating from
the end of the sample to the Loop Position. Release the pad to stop the repeating playback.
•
Alternating: You can hold down the pad to cause that sample to play from the Loop Position to
the end of the sample and then play in reverse until it reaches the Loop Position again. This will
repeat as long as you are holding the pad down. Release the pad to stop the repeating playback.


---

## Page 189

189

Tap Warp to enable or disable warping of the sample.
When enabled, lengthening or shortening the sample (based on the BPM) will not change its pitch.
When disabled, lengthening or shortening the sample will also change its pitch and vice versa.

Use the Stretch field to set the “stretch factor,” which affects how the sample is warped (if Warp is on).

Use the BPM field to enter a tempo, which affects how the sample is warped (if Warp is on).

Tap BPM Sync to enable or disable BPM Sync.
When BPM Sync and Warp are both enabled, the sample’s BPM will be “locked” to the tempo of the project.
When BPM Sync is disabled but Warp is enabled, the sample will be independent of the tempo of your project—use the
Stretch field to lengthen or shorten a sample.

Note: The Warp algorithms are very CPU-intensive and can result in audio drop-outs during playback if used too freely.
Be mindful of how (and how often) you use the warp function. You can reduce the CPU resources required by doing any/all
of the following:
•
Avoid using extreme Stretch values.
•
Minimize the amount of pitch adjustment (e.g., the Semi and Fine parameters) of warped audio.
•
Avoid warping very small clip regions.
•
Warp as few clips or clip regions as possible (i.e., reduce the number of total number of voices of the polyphonic limit
that use the Warp algorithm at a given time), especially instances where the warped regions start at the same time.
•
Avoid rapidly triggering samples that are warped.
•
If you have warped samples used in a drum kit, consider using the Flatten Pad function to consolidate the affected
pad’s layers into one audio sample (see here to learn about this). After you flatten the pad, its sample/samples no
longer need to be warped.


---

## Page 190

190

The second Samples tab contains controls for its pitch, volume level and panning.

Semi lets you transpose the selected layer 36 up to semitones up or down. This will affect the length of the sample (if
Warp is off). This is the same as the Semi field on the first Samples tab.

Fine provides fine-tuning of each layer by cents. This will affect the length of the sample (if Warp is off). This is the same
as the Fine field on the first Samples tab.

Level lets you adjust each layer’s volume, letting you control the “balance” of the samples assigned to the pad.

Pan adjusts the stereo placement of the respective layer.


---

## Page 191

191

The third Samples tab contains the control for its offset and velocity range.

Use the Offset slider to determine a time offset for the sample’s playback.
•
Positive values (right of center): When the pad is played, playback will start immediately but at a later point in the
sample specified by the offset value.
•
Negative values (left of center): When the pad is played, playback will be delayed by the amount specified by the
offset value.

Use the Vel Start and Vel End knobs to define the velocity range of each layer.
A range from 0 to 127 lets the layer respond to the entire velocity range which is input from the respective pad while, for
example, a range from 100 to 127 lets the layer respond only to higher velocity levels. By assigning several samples of
one instrument, you can create a realistic-sounding “multi-sample” by adjusting the velocity ranges of each layer
accordingly.
For example, you may have three samples of a drum hit with low force, medium force, and high force. You can set each
sample to a layer and set the Velocity ranges so only low velocities trigger the low-force sample, only mid-range velocities
trigger the medium-force sample, and only high velocities trigger the high-force sample.


---

## Page 192

192

The fourth Samples tab contains the controls for adding randomization to sample parameters such as pitch, level and
panning.

Use the Pitch knobs to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s pitch.

Use the Level knobs to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s volume.

Use the Pan knobs to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s stereo placement.

Use the Offset sliders to adjust the amount of randomization applied to each sample layer’s time offset.

The All Layers section will apply randomization to all sample layers for the following envelope parameters: Attack, Decay,
Cutoff and Resonance. Use the Depth slider to control the amount of envelope randomization applied overall.


---

## Page 193

193

Envelopes
Tap Envelopes to cycle through its three available tabs.

The first Envelope tab contains the amplitude modulation envelope.

Pad Level controls the overall volume level of the loaded sample/samples.

Pad Pan controls the overall panning of the loaded sample/samples in the stereo field.

The Amp Envelope controls affect level changes over time. Use the fields or tap and drag the “handles” of the envelope
to shape the envelope or time-variant modulation output. Adjust the envelope’s influence on the filter frequency with the
Env knob. See the later Anatomy of an Envelope section to learn about the envelope parameters.

The Velocity Modulation controls determine how much the velocity affects the volume level of the amplitude envelope
(Amp), the attack of the amplitude envelope (Amp Attack), and/or the panning of the sound (Pan).
When you press a pad softly, only minimal modulation is applied. When you press it harder, the modulation amount also
gets stronger depending on the setting of the corresponding slider.


---

## Page 194

194

The second Envelope tab contains the filter modulation envelope.

Use the Type field to select a filter for the selected pad. See Appendix > Glossary > Filter for an explanation of the
available filter types.

Use the Cutoff knob to set the cutoff frequency for low-pass and high-pass filter types or the center frequency for bandpass and band-stop filter types.

Use the Reso knob to set the resonance/emphasis of the frequencies around the cutoff point.
Tip: Use values lower than 80 to give more brilliance to the sound. At values higher than 80, the sound will result in a
strong audible boost around the cutoff frequency.

The Filter Envelope controls affect the filter frequency. Use the fields or tap and drag the “handles” of the envelope to
shape the envelope or time-variant modulation output. Adjust the envelope’s influence on the filter frequency with the
Depth knob. See the later Anatomy of an Envelope section to learn about the envelope parameters.

Use the Depth slider to determine the amount of influence the filter envelope has on the cutoff frequency. Higher settings
will increase the modulation of the filter by the envelope; lower settings will result in only subtle changes of the filter Cutoff
over time.
Tip: To give a sound a more distinctive attack, increase the Depth setting and set low Atk and Decay values as well
as a medium-low Sust value of the Filter Envelope. This will start a sound with the filter opened and close it shortly
afterward, giving it a bright start followed by a darker sustain. String sounds, on the other hand, can sound much more
“alive” with low Depth settings and a high Atk value, resulting in a slight fade-in of the higher frequencies.

The Velocity Modulation controls determine how much the velocity affects the cutoff frequency of the filter envelope
(Cutoff), the attack phase of the filter envelope (Attack), and/or depth of influence the filter envelope has on the cutoff
frequency (Depth).
When you press a pad softly, only minimal modulation is applied. When you press it harder, the modulation amount also
gets stronger depending on the setting of the corresponding slider.


---

## Page 195

195

The third Envelope tab contains the pitch modulation envelope.

Global Semi lets you transpose the pad up to 36 semitones up or down. This will affect the length of the sample (if Warp
is off). This is the same as the Semi field on the Global tab.

Global Fine provides fine-tuning of each layer by cents. This will affect the length of the sample (if Warp is off). This is the
same as the Fine field on the Global tab.

The Pitch Envelope controls affect the pad’s pitch. Use the fields or tap and drag the “handles” of the envelope to shape
the envelope or time-variant modulation output. Adjust the envelope’s influence on the pitch with the Depth slider. See
the later Anatomy of an Envelope section to learn about the envelope parameters.

The Velocity Modulation control determines how much the velocity affects the pitch envelope (Pitch).
When you press a pad softly, only minimal modulation is applied. When you press it harder, the modulation amount also
gets stronger depending on the setting of the Pitch slider.
