# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 31-45)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 31

31

Mixing Tracks

Force's mixer allows you to adjust parameters such as level, stereo panning and routing the same way you would with a
traditional mixer or digital audio workstation.

To open the Mixer, press Mixer. Alternatively, press Menu and tap Mixer.

The Mixer contains four tabs of pages that let you control different settings for the tracks and buses. Tap and drag your
finger to scroll through available tracks, or use the cursor buttons.

Let's start with the Pan & Volume tab. Tap the tab at the bottom of the
display to select it. Launch a scene in your project and try making a few
of the following adjustments to the tracks:
To adjust the track volume, tap and drag your finger on the
volume slider, or tap it and then use the data dial or
-/+ buttons.
To adjust the track panning, tap and drag your finger on the Pan
slider, or tap it and then use the data dial or -/+ buttons.
To mute or solo the track, tap the M or S buttons, respectively.
To give a track a crossfader assignment, tap the A or B buttons
at the bottom of the display.


---

## Page 32

32

Next, tap the Effects tab. Let's try adding an insert effect to a track:
1. Tap the Inserts button in Track 4 – Hat Loop to open the Inserts
window. Empty insert slots below this button are marked with a +
sign.
2. Double-tap the first effect slot. A list of effects will appear.
3. Swipe up or down to move through the list, or turn the data dial.
4. To load an effect, double-tap it. Alternatively, tap it once and then
tap Select or push the data dial. Let’s add the Reverb Small effect.
5. To close the list, tap Close.
6. Now that the effect has been added to the track, you can adjust the
settings to your preference.
To adjust the effect’s parameters, tap the pencil icon.
To empty the effect slot, tap the trash can icon. Switch the
effect on or off by tapping the On/Off button for the slot.

See Operation > Modes > Mixer to learn more about this feature.


---

## Page 33

33

Cueing Tracks

In addition to using the Solo button to isolate a track, you can use it to cue tracks. This allows you to preview the sound
of a track using the Phones output or Outputs 3/4 before sending it to the main mix for your audience to hear.

To cue tracks:
1. Connect headphones to the Phones output, or connect Outputs
3/4 to your monitors, mixer, etc.
2. Open the Mixer Config window, either by pressing Settings while
viewing the Mixer, or by holding Shift and pressing Solo or Mute.
3. Set the Solo Button Behavior to Cue Tracks.
4. Adjust the Cue Mix knob so that it is between 3/4 and Master. You
can adjust the exact mix to your preference. Turn the Cue Mix knob
toward 3/4 for more of the cued track audio, or more toward
Master for more of the main mix audio.
5. Press the Solo button.
6. Press the Track Assign button for the track you would like to
assign to the cue mix.
When viewing certain pages of the Mixer, the S icon in the channel
strip will become a Headphones icon that is highlighted when
enabled.
When viewing the Matrix, a Headphones icon will be added to the
track heading.
7. Launch a clip in the track you have cued. You should hear both the
main mix and the audio of the cued track.
8. Using headphones attached to the Phones Output on Force's front
panel, and/or speakers connected to Outputs 3/4, listen to the
cued audio to make sure it is in sync with your main mix.
9. When you are ready to send the track audio to the main mix, press
the Solo button and the Track Assign button for the track to
disable cueing.


---

## Page 34

34

Recording Clips

Now that you're more familiar with the basics of clip launching and editing, let's try recording new clips to add to the
project.

Before recording, let's create a new scene and an empty clip to
record into:
1. Press Matrix to open Clip Matrix Mode on the display.
2. Hold Edit and press the top Scene Launch button (below the
Arrange scene launch) to open the Edit Row window.
3. Tap the Insert icon. A new row will be created at the top of the
Matrix.
4. On the display, double-tap an empty clip slot in your new scene to
create a new clip. New clips are always created at the default
length, which can be set by holding Shift and holding the second
Track Assign button.
Alternatively, you can create an empty clip using the clip launch
pads. First, press the Launch button to enter Launch mode. Then,
hold the Select button and double-tap an empty pad.

Recording with Note Mode

In addition to using the clip launch pads for launching clips, you can use them to record notes chromatically as you would
use a MIDI keyboard. This is enabled by pressing the Note button to enter Note Mode.

In the Deep House – Colors project, select Track 6 – Classic Bass and press Note to view Note Mode in action. In Note
Mode, the appearance of the pads will change. The root note or chord will be lit in one color, and the notes or chords in
between will be lit white.


---

## Page 35

35

To configure the pads in Note Mode, hold Shift and press Note to
open the Note Config window. In this window, you can set the function
of the pads, from playing notes in a scale to playing full chord
progressions. For now, let's leave Type set to Scales and set Pad
Rows to Start on root.
See Operation > General Features > Pad Modes > Note Mode to
learn more.

Now, let's prepare the clip and track for recording:
1. Create an empty clip in Track 6 – Classic Bass following the
directions above.
2. Launch the clip to make sure it is playing.
3. Press the Rec Arm button, then press the sixth Track Select
button to record enable the track. A record symbol will appear
under the track name.
4. Finally, when you are ready to record, press the Rec button. On the
display, the selected clip will turn red and show Overdub.
5. Try recording a simple bassline using the clip launch pads in Note
mode. Press Undo at any time to undo any recorded note events.
6. You have finished recording, press the Rec button again to stop
recording.

You can also change the recording configurations to suit your
preferences.
1. Press Matrix to open Clip Matrix Mode on the display.
2. Press and hold Record, and in the window that appears, tap
Settings to open the Record Configuration window. Alternatively,
hold Edit and press Record.
3. Check the Write automation when recording box to capture
automation while recording.
Use the Record Launch field to set how recording is initiated.
When set to Pad, tap any pad while the track is armed to begin
recording. When set to REC Button or Pad, tap any pad while the
track is armed to begin recording, or press the Record button to
begin recording on the highlighted clip slot. When set to REC
Button then Pad, first press the record button, then tap any pad to
begin recording. This is the default mode when Force is powered
on.
Use the Clip Record To field to set the behavior when recording is
completed, entering either Overdub or Play.
Use the Record Arm field to set whether the Track Assign buttons
can be used to arm a Single track at a time, or Multiple tracks.
Check the Fixed Length Recording box to stop recording after the
clip length set in the Fixed Length (Bars) field. Leave unchecked
to record for any desired clip length.
4. When you are finished, tap Close to close the Record Configuration
window.


---

## Page 36

36

Recording with the Step Sequencer

When sequencing drums, you can use Force's built-in Step Sequencer to quickly enter note events by using the clip
launch pads as “step buttons,” simulating the experience of a traditional step-sequencer-style drum machine.

When using the Step Sequencer, you can assign the clip launch pads to a number of different modes depending on the
type of track. These include:

Drum: In this mode, the top four rows of pads represent each step
in the clip. The bottom four rows of pads are split into two 4x4
quadrants: the left quadrant is used for selecting and triggering
drum sounds, while the right quadrant is used to select the velocity
of the note events. This mode is most useful for recording drum
parts with the step sequencer.

Melodic: In this mode, the top four rows of pads represent each
step in the clip. The bottom four rows of pads are notes in the set
scale, which can be adjusted by holding Shift and pressing Step
Seq. This mode is most useful for recording melodic parts such as
a bassline with the step sequencer.

Lanes: In this mode, each column of clip launch pads represents a
step in the clip. The eight rows represent eight different pads. You
can set the base pad by holding Shift and pressing Step Seq.

See Operation > General Features > Pad Modes > Step Sequencer to learn more about the other Step Sequencer pad
modes.

To cycle between these modes, press the Step Seq button. You can also press and hold the Step Seq button while in
any Step Sequence mode to quickly select another mode.


---

## Page 37

37

Let's use the Drum mode to sequence a drum pattern using the Step Sequencer.
1. Select Track 2 – Top Loop and add a new empty clip as described above.
2. Make sure the clip you are recording into is playing, otherwise you won't hear the pattern you are creating.
3. Press Menu and then tap Step Sequencer on the display.
4. Press the Step Seq button until Drum is shown on the display. The pads will now be in Drum mode.
5. Select the bass drum sound by pressing its pad (A01).
Tip: Press and hold the Clip Select button and then press a pad to select it without sounding the sample.
6. Use the top four rows of clip launch pads to sequence a simple bass drum pattern.
You can also change portion of the clip you are viewing and editing by pressing and holding the Step Seq button and
using the top row(s) of clip launch pads. The number of pages available depends on the selected step size and the
number of bars in the clip.
7. Next, select a snare drum sound (A02) and sequence a pattern.
8. Finally, select a hi-hat sound (A03) and sequence a pattern. Try using the velocity pads to vary the velocity of the hihat sounds to make the clip sound more realistic.

See Operation > General Features > Pad Modes > Step Sequencer and Operation > Modes > Step Sequencer to
learn more about this feature.


---

## Page 38

38

Operation

This chapter explains the complete features and functions of your Force hardware.

Important:
•
When the left-most button at the bottom of the screen shows an upward arrow (), it means there are
additional buttons you can use when you press and hold Shift. Press and hold Shift to show the secondary
buttons, and any of them, if desired. Release Shift to return to the previous buttons.
•
Many modes shown on the screen have 1–6 buttons at the bottom. Each of these buttons select a different
tab in that mode or perform a specific function in that mode.
•
As an alternative to double-tapping an item on the screen to “enter” it, you can press the data dial.
•
When a parameter is highlighted and has a red outline, this means that it is selected. You can then change
it by turning the hardware’s data dial or using the –/+ buttons. If the parameter is a number, double-tap it
to show a numeric keypad on the screen to enter a specific value.

General Features

Control Types

The Force touchscreen uses the following types of control elements:

Knobs
To set the value for a knob, do any of the following:
•
Tap and drag the knob up or down.
•
Tap the knob to select it, and then use the data dial or –/+ buttons to
adjust the value.
•
Double-tap the knob to show it in a larger screen. Alternatively, press
data dial when the knob is selected.
Tap and drag the larger version that appears, or use the data dial or
–/+ buttons to adjust the value.
If the knob is bipolar (has positive and negative values with the center
as the default position), double-tap the larger version to reset it to the
center/0 position.
Tap anywhere else to return to the previous screen.
•
Press and hold Shift while turning the data dial to adjust a value by
smaller increments.


---

## Page 39

39

Parameter Values
To set the value for a parameter, do either of the following:
•
Tap the field to select it, and then use the data dial or –/+ buttons to
adjust the value.
When the value has decimal places, you can sometimes press and hold
Shift and then use the data dial or –/+ buttons to adjust the value by
smaller increments.
•
Double-tap the field or hold your finger on it for a second. In the
screen that appears, type in a value using the number pad, or use the
data dial or the –/+ buttons to adjust the value. Alternatively, tap and
drag the value up or down.
You can also tap /2 to halve the value or x2 to double it.
To confirm the value and remain on this screen, tap Apply.
To confirm the value and return to the previous screen, tap Do It.
To return to the previous screen, tap the gray area in the upper-left
corner of the screen. Unsaved changes made using the number pad
will not be applied. All other changes will be saved.

Drop-Down Menus / Lists
To select an option for a drop-down menu, do any of the following:
•
Tap the field to select it, and then use the data dial or –/+ buttons to select an option.
•
Double-tap the field. In the list that appears (examples below), tap the desired option. Alternatively, use the data
dial or the –/+ buttons to select an option.
In some windows, tap the relevant button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your selection or to cancel without
changing anything.


---

## Page 40

40

Selectors
Selectors show all available options. One of them is always selected. The
selected option is highlighted while the others are dark.
To select an option, tap it.

Buttons
Buttons usually have two states: selected and deselected (active or inactive,
respectively). Some may have more than two states.
To switch between or cycle through a button’s states, do either of the
following:
•
Tap it.
•
If it is outlined in red (and is not a mute button), use the data dial or
–/+ buttons.

Checkboxes
Checkboxes have two states: checked and unchecked (enabled or disabled,
respectively).
To check or uncheck a checkbox, tap it.

Tabs
Some modes have buttons at the bottom of the screen that let you cycle
through several similar tabs. For instance, you could view the send level that is
routed to each of four returns—each level is shown on a separate tab. With
each tap, you will move to the next tab, indicated by the squares below it.
To select a tab, tap it. Each time you tap it, it will select the next tab.


---

## Page 41

41

Sliders
To adjust the position of a slider, do any of the following:
•
Tap and drag the slider to the desired position.
•
Tap the desired position (this works only on some sliders).
•
Tap the slider to select it, and then use the data dial or –/+ buttons to
adjust the position (this works only on some sliders).
•
Double-tap the slider, and then tap and drag the larger version that
appears, or use the data dial or –/+ buttons to adjust the value. Tap
anywhere else to return to the previous screen.

Envelopes
To set the stages of an envelope, do either of the following:
Tip: Tap the expand-rectangle icon above the envelope to show a close-up view.
•
Tap and drag a “handle” of an envelope stage in the desired direction.
•
Set the numeric value of an envelope stage by adjusting or entering it as a parameter value (described
earlier).

The Envelope tab in Track Edit Mode.

Close-up of an AD-type filter envelope.
Close-up of an AHDS-type amp envelope.


---

## Page 42

42

Clip Event Editor Tools
When viewing a MIDI clip in the Clip Event Editor, these four icons enable you to use different functions in the grid.

Tap one to select its mode:

Pencil: Draw Mode:
To enter a note in an empty grid square, tap the grid square.
To select a note, tap it.
To move a note, tap and drag it to another grid square.
To erase a note, double-tap it.
To edit velocity or draw automation, open the velocity/automation lane and tap and drag.

Eraser: Erase Mode:
To erase a note, tap it. You can also tag and drag to erase multiple notes in the same row.

Select Box: Select Mode:
Note: Notes will remain selected if you switch to another mode. The selection will change, however, if you press
a pad while Hitting Pad Selects All Events is set to On.
To select a note, tap it.
To select multiple notes, tap and drag across the grid to create a box around them.
To move a note, tap and drag it to another grid square.
To move multiple notes, select them as described above, and tap and drag them.
To erase multiple notes, select them as described above, and then select the eraser tool and tap any of the
selected notes.

Magnifying Glass: Navigation Mode:
To move to another part of the grid, tap and drag it.
To zoom in or out, spread or pinch your fingers (respectively) on the grid. You can do this vertically,
horizontally, or both at the same time.


---

## Page 43

43

When viewing an audio clip in the Clip Event Editor, these seven tool icons enable you to use different functions in the
waveform.

Tap one to select its mode:

Marquee: Marquee Mode:
To select a track region, tap the upper third of it.
To select multiple track regions, tap and drag across the grid to create a box that highlights them.
To move a track region (or multiple selected track regions), tap and drag the upper third of it left or right.
To split the track at two specific points (creating a track region on either side and between them), tap and drag
across the middle third of it to create a translucent white box, and then tap the upper third of that box.
To shorten or lengthen a track region (or multiple selected track regions), tap and drag the lower third of it
left or right.

Arrow: Selection Mode:
To select a track region, tap it.
To move a track region (or multiple selected track regions), tap and drag the upper third of it left or right.
To shorten or lengthen a track region (or multiple selected track regions), tap and drag the lower third of it
left or right.

Pencil: Draw Mode:
To draw automation, open the velocity/automation lane and tap and drag.

Eraser: Erase Mode:
To erase a track region (or multiple selected track regions), tap it.

Scissors: Split Mode:
To split the track at a specific point (creating a track region on either side), tap that point in the track.
To select a track region, tap its left-most edge.

Mute: Mute Mode:
To mute or unmute a track region (or multiple selected track regions), tap it.

Magnifying Glass: Navigation Mode:
To move to another part of the track, tap and drag it.
To zoom in or out, spread or pinch your fingers (respectively) on the grid. You can do this vertically,
horizontally, or both at the same time.


---

## Page 44

44

Pad Modes

In addition to the various control functions used in the display, Force features three different control modes for the 8x8
grid of clip launch pads: Launch Mode, Note Mode, and Step Sequencer Mode. You can also control Launch and Note
Modes at the same time using Launch & Note Mode.
These modes are accessed by pressing their respective Launch/Config, Note/Config, and Step Seq/Config buttons on
the Force hardware. At any time, you can also temporarily view any of the pad modes by pressing and holding the Launch,
Note, or Step Seq buttons. This allows you to quickly make changes such as launching a different clip or editing the step
sequencer.

Launch Mode

Launch Mode is used for launching and working with clips. The image
to the right shows the pads in Launch Mode. The brightly lit pads each
represent clips in the respective track columns.

To enter Launch Mode, press the Launch button. In Launch Mode,
you can do any of the following:
To launch a clip, press the clip launch pad.
To select a clip, hold Select and press a pad.
To create a new clip, hold Select and double-press an empty pad.
To copy a clip, hold Copy and press the pad you want to copy. Keep holding Copy and press the pad where you
want to copy the clip.
To delete a clip, hold Delete and press the pad you want to delete.
To set the quantization of launching clips, hold Shift and press one of the Track Select buttons. The time division
values are printed beneath them.

Launch Configuration
Press and hold Shift and press the Launch/Config button to open the
Launch Configuration window.
Use the Default Length (Bars) field to set the default length of new
clips in bars.
Use the Empty Slots field to set the appearance of the clip launch
pads that do not have a clip loaded.
Check Tapping a clip selects it to automatically select a clip for
editing when tapped. When unchecked, tapping a clip will only
launch it.
Check Show arrangement in clip matrix to enable the
Arrangement row at the top of the clip matrix.


---

## Page 45

45

Note Mode

Note Mode is used for playing drum kits or melodic tracks like keygroups or plugins.

To enter Note Mode, press the Note button while a drum, keygroup, plugin, MIDI or CV track is selected. The appearance
of the clip launch pads will change depending on the type of track selected. When a drum track is selected, the clip launch
pads will appear in Drum Note Mode; when a keygroup, plugin, MIDI or CV track is selected, the clip launch pads will
appear in Melodic Note Mode.

Drum Note Mode

In Drum Note Mode, each quadrant of clip launch pads can be used
like a traditional 4x4 drum pad layout to play samples. The image to the
right shows a traditional layout when using Drum Note Mode.

In Drum Note Mode, you can do the following:
To play a sample, press any of the lit clip launch pads.
To change pad banks, hold Shift and press the Track Assign
buttons labeled Oct- and Oct+.
To select a pad, hold Select and press it.
To edit a sample in Track Edit Mode, hold Edit and press a pad.
To create a keygroup from a sample, hold Shift+Edit and press
a pad. The keygroup will be created on a new track automatically.
To copy a sample, hold Copy and press the pad you want to copy.
Keep holding Copy and press the pad where you want to copy the
sample.
To delete a pad, hold Delete and press the pad you want to delete.
To mute a pad, hold Mute and press the pad you want to mute.
To solo a pad, hold Solo and press the pad you want to solo.
To set the quantization of launching clips, hold Shift and press
one of the Track Select buttons. The time division values are
printed beneath them.

Drum Note Configuration
Press and hold Shift and press the Note/Config button to open the
Drum Note Configuration window, where you can adjust the settings
of the drum pads.
Use the Velocity field to set the velocity level of the drum pads.
Select As Played for responsive velocities, or select Half level or
Full level for fixed level velocities.
Use the Bank field to select the drum bank currently in view in the
bottom left quadrant.
