# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 376-390)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 376

376

When in Chop Sample Edit Mode, you can use the lower-left quadrant of pads to add slices to the current sample or
trigger existing slices.

When the current Track is a Drum Program and Pad Sample Edit Mode is selected, you can use the lower-left quadrant
of pads to audition the current sample of the current pad, similar to using Notes mode with a Drum Program.

Single or Multi Record Arm

You can now configure the behavior of the Record Arm buttons by adjusting the Record Arm setting under Preferences
> Sequencer.
•
In Single mode, selecting a different track will automatically arm that track and disarm all other tracks. This is the
default mode and is the same as previous Force releases. To arm multiple tracks to record in Single mode, hold
Shift and tap each track's record button.
•
In Multi mode, you can tap any track's record button to add it to the group of armed tracks. This is useful when
doing multitrack recording.

Workflow Enhancements

You can now disable multiple Mute, Solo or Record Arm buttons by holding the Delete button and pressing one of the
Assign Mode Buttons.

You can now add the Slice parameter to automation for Drum and Keygroup tracks.

When the Master button is pressed, a notification now appears on screen temporarily to indicate whether the pads are
showing the Buses or project tracks.

The track automation buttons available in Mixer Mode now toggle between Read and Write states when tapped. To
turn automation off or on, hold Shift and tap the track automation button.

The Timing Correct (TC) window now has a convenient Global Timing Correct On/Off button.

You can now exclude a track from a scene launch. Double-tap the track header in Matrix mode to open the Track Settings
popup, and then select the Row Launch field. When this field is set to Exclude from row launch, the track's clips will
not launch when a scene is launched. This is useful when playing a full acapella track while triggering different clips
underneath.

In the Arpeggiator window, the Time Division field is now a radio selector, making it easier to use.

You can now merge samples and settings from two drums tracks together.
To show the Merge Pads window, tap the pencil icon in the toolbar of Grid or Clip modes. After the Grid Edit
window opens, tap Merge Pads.
Use the From Track menu to select the track from which the pads will be copied.
Use the Into Track menu to select the track to which the copied pads will be merged.
Check the Start on next bank box to merge the samples and settings at the start of the next unused bank.
Click Do It to merge the pads or Cancel to return to the previous screen.


---

## Page 377

377

You can now configure the brightness of the Force's pads. Go to Preferences > Hardware and use the Pad Brightness
slider to adjust the intensity of the pads.

You can now select a single event or multiple events when using the Step Sequence pad mode.
1. Open Grid or Clip modes to view the Grid editor.
2. Press the Step Seq button to enter Step Sequence mode for the pad matrix.
3. Enter some note events into the sequence using the pads.
4. To select step event, press and hold Clip Select and tap one of the pads containing an event.
To select multiple step events, press and hold Shift and Clip Select at the same time, and then tap the pads
containing the events.

The MIDI Monitor now contains port names.


---

## Page 378

378

Updates in Force 3.0.6

New Features

AIR DrumSynth

The AIR DrumSynth plugins emulate the sound of classic drum
machines and feature multiple synthesis types, advanced
modeling and carefully crafted, built-in effects to create
powerful contemporary drum sounds.

To use AIR DrumSynth:
1. Press Matrix to enter Matrix Mode.
2. Press the + icon at the top of the screen, or press and hold
a Track Select button to add a new track.
3. Tap Plugin to create a plugin track.
4. Double-tap the track header to open the Track Settings
window.
5. Double-tap the Plugin field. In the list that appears,
expand the Force Drum Plugins option and select the
desired option. You can add the following drum types as
individual plugins per track: Clap, Crash, HiHat, Kick,
Perc, Ride, Snare and Tom. Each of these instruments
has comprehensive synthesis and effects sections
described below.

In each plugin, you can quickly enable or disable the built-in effects (Transient, Distortion, EQ and Compressor) while
viewing any of the tabs listed below by tapping the buttons on the right side of the touchscreen under FX.

Drum Sound
Use this tab to adjust the basic settings for the drum sound. You can also use the knobs on this tab to quickly adjust
up to eight parameters specifically chosen for each sound.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Model

Type of drum sound emulated.
Varies
One-Shot

Allows the drum sound to play entirely when triggered
or only for how long the note length is set.
Enabled, Disabled
Velocity

Amount of incoming Velocity applied. When set to 0,
all notes will sound as if Full Level.
0–100%
Velocity 2

Amount of additional Velocity envelope that can be
used to control a parameter.
-100 – 0 – +100%

Target
Select the Parameter where the Velocity 2 information
is sent.
Param 1–8
Gain

Volume level of the drum sound.
-Inf, -68.0 – 0 – +12.0 dB
Parameter
Knobs

Each drum sound has up to eight associated
parameters that can be used to further shape the
sound. The available parameters vary based on the
type of drum sound selected. Use the knobs to adjust
the selected parameter.
Varies


---

## Page 379

379

Trans/Dist
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the Transient and Distortion effects.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Transient
Attack
Decreases or increases the amount of
transient attack applied to the signal.
-100 – 0 – +100%

Shape
Adjusts the shape of the processed transient. 0–100%

Sustain
Percentage of sustain envelope subtracted
from or added to the transient effect.
-100 – 0 – +100%
Distortion
Pre-Shape
Increases or decreases the high-end tone of
the incoming audio signal pre-distortion.
-100 – 0 – +100%

Drive
Amount of drive applied.
0–60 dB

Threshold
Signal level after which the distortion will be
applied.
-20.0–0.0 dB FS

High Cut
Center frequency of the distortion signal highcut filter.
1.00–20.0 kHz

Mix
Wet/dry amount of the distortion effect.
0–100%

EQ/Comp
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the EQ and Compressor effects.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
EQ
High Freq
Center frequency for the High EQ band.
1.20 – 20.0 kHz

High Gain
Amount of gain applied to the High EQ band. Cut, -12.0 – 0 – +12.0 dB

High Mid Freq
Center frequency for the High Mid EQ band.
120 Hz – 16.0 kHz

High Mid Q
Width of the High Mid EQ band.
0.40–10.00

High Mid Gain
Amount of gain applied to the High Mid EQ
band.
-18.0 – 0 – +18.0 dB

Low Mid Freq
Center frequency for the Low Mid EQ band.
40.0 Hz – 8.00 kHz

Low Mid Q
Width of the Low Mid EQ band.
0.40–10.00

Low Mid Gain
Amount of gain applied to the Low Mid EQ
band.
-18.0 – 0 – +18.0 dB

Low Freq
Center frequency for the Low EQ band.
20.0 Hz – 1.00 kHz

Low Gain
Amount of gain applied to the Low EQ band.
Cut, -12.0 – 0 – +12.0 dB
Compressor
Ratio
Amount of compression applied.
1.0:1 – 100.0:1

Attack
Length of time to apply the compression.
100 us – 300 ms

Threshold
Signal level after which the compressor will
be applied.
-60.0–0.0 dB

Output
Amount of additional output gain for the
compressed signal.
0.0–30.0 dB


---

## Page 380

380

You can also use the DrumSynth:Multi plugin to access all
DrumSynth sounds from one plugin, which includes additional
dedicated effects and mixing controls.
Note: You can only have one DrumSynth:Multi plugin active
per project.

DrumSynth 1–8 / Trans/Dist / EQ/Comp
Use the first eight tabs in the Multi to control the same
parameters as the individual DrumSynth plugins. Tap each
tab to cycle between the Drum Sound view, the
Trans/Dist view, and the EQ/Comp view.

Send FX
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the Delay, Diffuser and Reverb effects.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Delay
Time
Length of time between the dry signal and the
delayed signal.
1/32 – 8/4

Ratio
Reduces the delay Time in either the Left or
Right stereo field. This is useful for creating
offset, panned delays.
L 100:50, R 50:100

Feedback
Amount of delay signal fed back into the
delay line.
0–100%

Filter Freq
Sets the center frequency of the filtered delay
signal.
1.00 – 20.0 kHz

Reso
Amount of resonance of the feedback signal.
0–100%

Reso Freq
Center frequency for feedback resonance.
100 Hz – 10.0 kHz
Diffuser
Delay
Delay time between the dry signal and the
diffused signal.
1/64 – 4/4

Feedback
Amount of diffused signal sent back into the
delay line.
0–100%

Diffusion
Rate of increasing density of reverb
reflections.
At lower settings, the sound of individual
reflections is more present.
At higher settings, reflections are more
uniform.
0–100%

Bright
Adjusts the high-end tone of the diffused
signal.
0–100%
Reverb
Mode
Type of reverb applied.
Hall, Stadium, Room,
Abstract

Time
Length of reverb tail.
0.4 s – +Inf s

Low Cut
Center frequency for the reverb low-pass
filter.
1 – 1000 Hz

High Cut
Center frequency for the reverb high-pass
filter.
1.00 – 20.0 kHz


---

## Page 381

381

Mixer / FX / Sends
Use this tab to mix the individual drum sounds as well as control their effects. The Mixer / FX / Sends tab contains
three different views that can be accessed by tapping the tab at the bottom of the display.

Use the Mixer view to adjust the volume, panning, muting and soloing for each drum.
Tap the 1–8 icons to mute or unmute the selected drum.
Tap the S icon to solo the selected drum.
Tap and drag the pan slider to adjust the drum panning. Alternatively, tap the slider and use the encoder, or use
the appropriate knob in Screen mode.
Tap and drag the volume slider to adjust the drum volume. Alternatively, tap the slider and use the encoder, or
use the appropriate knob in Screen mode.

Use the FX view to enable or disable the Transient, Distortion, EQ and Compressor effects for each drum sound.
Tap the FX box to enable or disable the selected FX on the selected drum.

Use the Sends view to adjust the send levels for the Delay, Diffuser and Reverb Send FX.
Tap and drag the Send knob to adjust the send level for the selected effect on the selected drum. Alternatively,
tap the knob and use the encoder, or use the appropriate knob in Screen mode.


---

## Page 382

382

Updates in Force 3.1

New Features

Disk Streaming

Audio files can now be streamed from disk instead of from memory.
Note: Disk streaming relies on the performance of the disk you are streaming from. For best operation, it is recommended
to use an SSD (solid-state drive) connected to Force’s internal SATA port. Once you have saved a project to your SSD,
your files will stream from that location. For an unsaved project, Force uses a temporary file location to stream audio files
from. Go to Preferences > Project Load/Save and set the Temporary File Location to your SSD for best results.

To enable disk streaming:
1. Press Menu to open the Menu, and then tap the Preferences to open the Preferences page.
2. Tap Audio/Export, and then check the Enable Disk Streaming box. Force will require a restart after disk streaming
is enabled.

Once enabled, a sample can be set to stream from disk or memory. By default, Drum and Keygroup samples are loaded
into memory, as this works better for on-demand, rapid triggering of multiple, simultaneous voices.

To change a sample from streaming from memory to streaming from disk:
1. Press Menu to open the menu, and then tap Project at the top of the touchscreen to open the Project window.
2. From here, you can now filter your sample pool to show samples that are in Memory or Streaming by tapping the
buttons at the top of the sample pool. Samples in Memory are shown with a white waveform next to their name.
3. To change a sample to stream from memory, tap and hold on the sample name until a menu appears. Tap Stream
From Disk to set the sample to disk streaming.
A sample’s streaming or memory state will be saved and recalled with your project.
Note: Using streamed samples with Drum and Keygroup tracks may cause performance issues when triggering multiple
samples or retriggering at high rates.

When using files streamed from disk, sample lists such as those in Sample Edit Mode or Track Edit Mode can now be
grouped by Memory or Streaming status.

If a project is too large to be loaded into memory, Force now loads the project and displays the missing samples in the
Project window with a waveform with a red minus icon. Once enough memory has been freed up, the missing samples
can then be loaded from the Project window. Tap and hold on the sample name and then select Load To Memory from
the menu that appears.


---

## Page 383

383

AIR Mellotron, AIR Solina and WayOutWare Odyssey

Your Force hardware now includes three new plugin instruments: AIR Mellotron, AIR Solina and WayOutWare Odyssey.

To use the new plugins:
1. Make sure you have downloaded the new Synth Content installation pack from your account at akaipro.com.
2. Copy the Synths directory from the downloaded pack into the top-level folder of a SD card or USB drive. You do not
need to copy any of the other files. Then, insert the drive into your device.
Note: For maximum convenience, we recommend you install a SATA drive in the drive bay of your standalone Force
and then copy the Synths folder onto this drive.

AIR Mellotron

The AIR Mellotron plugin is a software recreation of the classic tape
keyboard, including reproductions of the original tape samples in both
clean and dirty versions.

Model
Use this tab to select a sound model and adjust its settings.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Sample
Select the tape loop sample.
8 Voice Choir, Boys Choir,
Flute, Violins 1, Violins 2,
Violin
Clean
Enables or disables a cleaner sample sound.
Off, On
Formant
Decreases or increases the harmonic resonance of
the formant frequency.
-12 – 0 – +12
Age
Amount of sound degradation applied.
0–100%
Smpl Start
Starting point of the tape loop sample.
0–100%
Cutoff
Ending point of the tape loop sample.
0–100%
Attack
Length of time for the sound to reach full level.
0 ms – 32 s
Release
Length of time for the sound to reach sustain level.
0 ms – 32 s
Vel > Amp
The amount of effect velocity has on amplitude control. 0–100%
MW Vib
Amount of vibrato applied from the mod wheel.
0–100%
AT Vib
Amount of vibrato applied from aftertouch.
0–100%
Vib Speed
Modulation speed of the vibrato effect.
0.03 – 30.00 Hz
Key On
Enables or disables key action noise on note on.
Off, On
Key Off
Enables or disables key action noise on note off.
Off, On
On Vol
Amount key on noise.
0–100%
Off Vol
Amount of key off noise.
0–100%
Smpl Poly
Number of voices available.
1–40
Level
Overall level of the plugin.
0–100%


---

## Page 384

384

AIR Mellotron (continued)

Flavor / Comp / EQ
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the flavor, compressor and EQ
effects. Each effect can be turned on and off by using the buttons on
the right side.

Parameter

Description
Value Range
Flavor

Use the button in the upper-right corner to enable or
disable the flavor effect.
Off, On

Timbre
Selects an emulation type to color the sound.
Varies

Timbre Depth
Amount of timbre emulation applied to the sound.
0–100%

Flutter
Amount of speed fluctuation of the sound playback.
0–100%

Vinyl Distortion Amount of vinyl distortion noise applied to the signal.
0–100%

Vinyl Noise
Amount of vinyl noise such as clicks and pops applied to
the signal.
0–100%
Compressor

Use the button in the upper-right corner to enable or
disable the compression effect.
Off, On

Threshold
Signal level after which the compressor will be applied.
-30.0 – 0.0 – +10.0 dB

Ratio
Amount of compression applied.
1.0:1 – 20.0:1

Attack
Length of time to apply the compression.
0–100%

Makeup
Amount of additional output gain for the compressed
signal.
-20.0 – 0.0 – +20.0 dB
EQ

Use the button in the upper-right corner to enable or
disable the EQ effect.
Off, On

Low
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the low
frequency band.
-12 – 0 – +12 dB

Low Mid
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the low-mid
frequency band.
-20 – 0 – +20 dB

High Mid
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the high-mid
frequency band.
-20 – 0 – +20 dB

High
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the high
frequency band.
-12 – 0 – +12 dB


---

## Page 385

385

AIR Mellotron (continued)

Delay / Spring
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the delay and spring reverb
effects. Each effect can be turned on and off by using the buttons on
the right side.

Parameter

Description
Value Range
Delay

Use the button in the upper-right corner to enable or
disable delay.
Off, On

Time
Amount of time between the dry signal and the delayed
signal.
1/16 – 12/4

L/R Ratio
Reduces the delay Time in either the Left or Right
stereo field. This is useful for creating offset, panned
delays.
50:100 – 100:100 –
100:50

Feedback
Amount of signal fed back into the delay line.
0–100%

Mix
Wet/dry amount of the delay effect.
0–100%

Reso LP Freq
Low pass frequency for feedback resonance.
100 – 16000 Hz

Reso Bell Freq Center frequency for feedback resonance.
100 – 16000 Hz

Reso Bell Gain Amount of gain applied to the resonant frequency.
0–100%
Spring Reverb

Use the button in the upper-right corner to enable or
disable the spring reverb effect.
Off, On

Pre-Delay
Length of time between dry signal and reverberated
signal.
0 – 250 ms

Time
Length of reverb tail.
1.00 – 10.00 s

Low Cut
Center frequency for reverb signal low-cut filter.
20 – 1000 Hz

Diffusion
Rate of increasing density of reverb reflections.
At lower settings, the sound of individual reflections is
more present.
At higher settings, reflections are more uniform.
0–100%

Width
Stereo width of reverb signal. Higher values give wider
stereo separation.
0–100%

Mix
Wet/dry amount of the reverb effect.
0–100%


---

## Page 386

386

AIR Solina

The AIR Solina plugin is a software recreation of the classic string
synthesizer.

Ensemble
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the synth voices.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Voice
Click each button to enable or disable the selected
voice.
Contra Bass, Cello, Viola,
Violin, Trumpet, Horn
Voice Volume
Volume of the selected voice.
-Inf – 0 – +12
Voice Panning
Stereo panning of the selected voice.
L64 – C – R64
Voice Octave
Octave adjustment for the selected voice.
-1, 0, +1
Ensemble
Enables or disables the ensemble effect.
Off, On
Bass Volume
Adjusts the volume of the bass voices.
0–100
Dual
When enabled, both bass and upper voices will play
on every key, regardless of the octave. When
disabled, the voices will be split so that the bass
voices play on lower octaves and the upper voices
play on higher octaves.
Off, On
Upper Volume
Adjusts the volume of the upper voices.
0–100%
Level
Overall level of the plugin.
0–100%


---

## Page 387

387

AIR Solina (continued)

Sound
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the synth voices.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
Crescendo
Length of time for the sound to reach full volume.
0 ms – 32 s
Sustain
Length of time for the sound to remain playing after the
key is released.
0 ms – 32 s
Formant
Decreases or increases resonant frequencies to adjust the
timbre of the sound.
-12 – 0 – +12
Filter
Adjusts the low-pass filter frequency.
0–100%
Age
Amount of detuning and drift applied.
0–100%
Velocity to Amp
The amount of effect velocity has on amplitude control.
0–100%
MW Vibrato
Amount of vibrato applied from the mod wheel.
0–100%
AT Vibrato
Amount of vibrato applied from aftertouch.
0–100%
Vibrato Speed
Modulation speed of the vibrato effect.
1.00–30.00 Hz
Sample Poly
Number of voices available.
1–50

Flavor
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the flavor and vinyl effects.

Parameter

Description
Value Range
Flavor

Enables or disables the flavor effect.
Off, On

Timbre
Selects an emulation type to color the sound.
Varies

Timbre Depth
Amount of timbre emulation applied to the sound.
0–100%

Vinyl Distortion
Amount of vinyl distortion noise applied to the signal.
0–100%

Vinyl Noise
Amount of vinyl noise such as clicks and pops applied to
the signal.
0–100%

Flutter
Amount of speed fluctuation of the sound playback.
0–100%

Monofy
Reduces the stereo spread.
0–100%


---

## Page 388

388

AIR Solina (continued)

Chorus / EQ
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the chorus and EQ effects. Use
the buttons on the right side to enable or disable each effect.

Parameter

Description
Value Range
Chorus
Rate
Modulation speed of the chorus effect.
0.05 – 20 Hz

Depth
Modulation depth of the chorus effect.
0–100%

Tone
Decreases or increases the brightness of the chorus effect.
-100 – 0 – +100%

Mix
Wet/dry amount of the chorus effect.
0–100%
EQ
Low
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the low frequency
band.
-12 – 0 – +12 dB

Low Mid
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the low-mid
frequency band.
-20 – 0 – +20 dB

High Mid
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the high-mid
frequency band.
-20 – 0 – +20 dB

High
Amount of attenuation or boost applied to the high frequency
band.
-12 – 0 – +12 dB


---

## Page 389

389

AIR Solina (continued)

Delay / Spring Reverb
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the delay and spring reverb
effects. Use the buttons on the right side to enable or disable each
effect.

Parameter

Description
Value Range
Delay
Time
Amount of time between the dry signal and the delayed
signal.
1/16 – 12/4

L/R Ratio
Reduces the delay Time in either the Left or Right stereo
field. This is useful for creating offset, panned delays.
50:100 – 100:100 –
100:50

Feedback
Amount of signal fed back into the delay line.
0–100%

LP Freq
Low pass frequency for feedback resonance.
100 – 16000 Hz

Bell Freq
Center frequency for feedback resonance.
100 – 16000 Hz

Bell Gain
Amount of gain applied to the resonant frequency.
0–100%

Mix
Wet/dry amount of the delay effect.
0–100%
Spring Reverb
Pre-Delay
Length of time between dry signal and reverberated signal.
0 – 250 ms

Time
Length of reverb tail.
1.00 – 10.00 s

Low Cut
Center frequency for reverb signal low-cut filter.
20 – 1000 Hz

Diffusion
Rate of increasing density of reverb reflections.
At lower settings, the sound of individual reflections is more
present.
At higher settings, reflections are more uniform.
0–100%

Width
Stereo width of reverb signal. Higher values give wider
stereo separation.
0–100%

Mix
Wet/dry amount of the reverb effect.
0–100%


---

## Page 390

390

WayOutWare Odyssey

The WayOutWare Odyssey plugin is a software recreation of the classic
analog synthesizer that captures the character and nuance of the
original Odyssey using WayOutWare’s experience and expertise in
circuit modeling and signal processing.

VCO 1 / 2
Use this tab to adjust the settings for the voltage-controlled oscillators.

Parameter
Description
Value Range
LFO/Audio

When set to Audio, standard pitches will be produced as
indicated by the Oct, Semi and CT values for the
Frequency setting.
When set to LFO, the VCO will be controlled by an LFO
and may be used for modulating VCO2.
LFO, Audio
Frequency

Determines the pitch adjustment for the oscillator. The
total frequency range depends on the LFO/ Audio
setting, and is shown at the bottom of this section.
0.174 – 1478.852 Hz

Coarse
Coarse pitch adjustment.
-0.200 – 6.333 V

Fine
Fine pitch adjustment.
0.000 – 0.875 V
VCO 1 FM
Source 1
Waveform
Type of frequency modulation waveform applied by the
LFO.
LFO Sine, LFO Square

Depth 1
Depth of frequency modulation.
0.0–100.0%

Source 2
Determines the frequency modulation source.
S/H, ADSR

Depth 2
Depth of Source 2 modulation.
0.0–100.0%
VCO 1 Pulse
Width
Width
Width of pulse width modulation.
50.0–90.0%
Mod
Depth of pulse width modulation.
0.0–100.0%

Source
Determines the pulse width modulation source.
LFO Sine, ADSR
Sync

Determines whether VCO 2 is synced with the frequency
of VCO 1. When disabled, you can use both VCOs to
produce separate pitches.
Off, On
Frequency

Pitch adjustment for the oscillator.
8.706 – 1478.852 Hz

Coarse
Coarse pitch adjustment.
-0.200 – 6.333 V

Fine
Fine pitch adjustment.
0.000 – 0.875 V
VCO 2 FM
Source 1
Type of modulation source. When S/H Mixer or Pedal is
selected, the modulation can be controlled by the
Sample and Hold mixer or by an optional external
expression pedal.
LFO Sine, S/H Mixer or
Pedal

Depth 1
Depth of Source 1 modulation.
0.0–100.0%

Source 2
Type of modulation source.
S/H, ADSR

Depth 2
Depth of Source 2 modulation.
0.0–100.0%
VCO 2 Pulse
Width
Width
Width of pulse width modulation.
50.0–90.0%
Mod
Depth of pulse width modulation.
0.0–100.0%

Source
Type of source for pulse width modulation.
LFO Sine, ADSR
