# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 256-270)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 256

256

Looping
Use the Enable looping field to select how the resulting samples
can or cannot be looped:
•
Off: The sample will not loop.
•
Forward: You can hold down the pad to cause that sample
to repeat from the Loop Position to the end of the sample.
Release the pad to stop the repeating playback.
•
Reverse: You can hold down the pad to cause that sample
to play in reverse, repeating from the end of the sample to
the Loop Position. Release the pad to stop the repeating
playback.
•
Alternating: You can hold down the pad to cause that
sample to play from the Loop Position to the end of the
sample and then play in reverse until it reaches the Loop
Position again. This will repeat as long as you are holding
the pad down. Release the pad to stop the repeating
playback.
Use the Loop start and Loop end sliders to set the starting and ending points in the sample where the loop will
occur.
Use the Crossfade slider to set the amount of crossfade between the loop end and loop start in seconds.
Use the Crossfade Type field to select Equal Power or Linear crossfade.

Under On completion, check Make current program to load the
completed sampler patch as the current track.

Under Info, the Session Duration field provides an estimate of how
long the auto sampling process will take.


---

## Page 257

257

Looper

The Looper lets you record and overdub audio in real time—a great tool for live performance as well as
spontaneous moments in the studio. You can export the loop as a sample to use in your project.

To open the Looper, press Menu, and then tap Looper.

Below is a brief step-by-step process so you can get started quickly. Continue reading the rest of this chapter to learn
how to use the Looper in different cases.

To get started using the Looper:
1. Make sure to reduce the volume levels of your audio source and speakers/headphones/monitors before you make
any connections to avoid “pops” or feedback.
2. Connect your audio source to the input/inputs of your Force hardware.
For line-level devices such as a synthesizer, set the Line/Inst switch to Line; for instrument-level devices such as a
guitar, set the switch to Inst.
If you are using a microphone that requires phantom power, set the +48V switch to On.
3. Turn the Gain knob to set the input level while playing your audio source. You should now see the level in the meter.
Make sure it does not exceed the maximum level (the meter should not be “peaking” constantly).
4. Set the recording controls as desired (described in this chapter).
5. Tap the Record To selector so Overdub is selected.
6. Tap the Rec/Record button in the lower-right corner to record-arm the Looper.
7. Play your audio source. The Looper will start recording immediately when the input level reaches the threshold value.
Alternatively, tap /Play at the bottom of the screen to manually start recording.
Each time the Looper repeats, its contents are being overdubbed—a new layer of audio will be added each time you
let the Looper repeat as it records.
Tip: You can record a loop while playing one or more clips in the background for reference.
8. To stop recording, tap /Play at the bottom of the screen.
To export your loop as a sample, tap Export to open the Keep or Discard Sample window.
To clear the contents of the Looper, tap Clear.


---

## Page 258

258

The upper-left Input Source field defines whether you are going to record an external audio
signal, which you can set to the pair of inputs (Input 1,2) or a single input (Input 1–2). You
can also select an internal signal from within your Force hardware (Resample L, Resample
R, or Resample L+R).
Resampling does not require an audio connection because the source is internal and is
therefore recorded without any loss in audio quality. You can, for example, use Resample to
record two or more samples by pressing the corresponding pads simultaneously.

Use the second upper-left Mono/Stereo field to choose whether your recorded loop will be
monaural (Mono) or binaural (Stereo).

The Inserts field shows any enabled or disabled effects for the Looper. Tap the area under
Inserts to open a window where you can load, change, and enable or disable the effects.
Important: These effects are applied to the audio as you record it. This means that the
effects cannot be “removed” from the sound later. Learn more about how effects work in
General Features > Effects.

Tap the Monitor button to enable or disable input monitoring.
When on, the audio you hear in your headphones will be taken before it reaches the Looper, ensuring zero latency. You
can turn input monitoring on only if the Input Source field is set to an input, not to a Resample setting.
When off, the audio you hear in your headphones will be taken after it is processed in the Looper, so there may be
some latency, but you will hear the audio source as it sounds in the recording.
Tip: To avoid possible clicks or feedback while input monitoring, reduce the level of the audio sources.

Use the threshold slider to adjust the threshold. Alternatively, turn Knob 1 when the knobs are set to screen mode. The
threshold slider will work only when Sync is off (see below).
When the Looper is record-armed, it automatically starts recording when the level of the incoming source exceeds this
setting. If you set it too high, the recording may not start when you play the input source, or the start of the material you
wanted to record may be missing. If you set it too low, the recording may start too early, before you play the external
source. Set this parameter to an appropriate level using the level meter.
To reset the “peak hold,” which shows the highest level of your input signal in the level meter, tap it.

Use the Bars field to define the length of your loop. Regardless of
how much or how little audio you record, this is how long your loop
will be.

Use the Sync button to sync or un-sync the looper with transport playback. When on, the Looper will stay in step with your
project. When you play or record into the Looper, it will wait until the transport starts playing to start.

Use the Record To selector to determine the loop recording behavior:
•
Play: Before recording, you must first tap the /Play button on the screen, which will start playing the Looper.
•
Overdub: Before recording, you must first tap the Rec/Record button in the lower-right corner to record-arm the
Looper.

Use the Output Gain slider to set the output signal level of the Looper.


---

## Page 259

259

To record with the Looper:
Important:
To record without erasing any audio you’ve already recorded in the loop, use the Overdub button.
To overwrite the audio you’ve already recorded, use the Replace button.

If Record To is set to Play:
To start recording, tap the Replace or Overdub button as the loop is playing. The Looper will start recording
immediately.
To stop recording, tap the Replace or Overdub button. The Looper will stop recording but continue playing.
To stop playback and recording, tap the /Play button.
If Record To is set to Overdub:
To start recording, tap the /Play button on the screen.
If Sync is off, you can also play your audio source so that the input level reaches the threshold value.
If Sync is on, you can also press the Play or Play Start button to start transport playback; recording will start
when the transport starts playing.
To stop recording, tap Overdub. The Looper will stop recording but continue playing.
To stop playback and recording, tap the /Play button, or press Stop to stop transport playback.

To play or stop the loop (without recording), tap the /Play button on the screen.

To reverse loop playback, tap Reverse. If Sync is on, playback will reverse once the Looper’s playhead reaches the end
of the loop. If Sync is off, playback will reverse immediately.

To erase the loop immediately, tap Clear.


---

## Page 260

260

To export the loop as a clip:
1. Tap Export to open the Looper Export window.
2. Use the Audio Track field to select the audio track you would like to export the clip to.
3. Use the Clip field to select the clip slot where you would like to place the loop.
4. Tap Export to Clip to confirm your choice, or Cancel to cancel.
When your loop is done exporting, it assigned to the track and clip slot you selected.


---

## Page 261

261

XYFX Mode

XYFX Mode turns the touchscreen into an XY pad where each axis represents the range of an effect parameter.
As you move your finger on the XY pad, the current position will determine the current value of the two
parameters. You can use this mode to create interesting effect automation on your tracks.
The effect you control in XYFX Mode acts like an insert effect on that track. In fact, XYFX is the name of the
insert effect you have to load to the track before you can use this mode. Learn more about this in General
Features > Effects.

To enter XYFX Mode, do either of the following:
•
Press Menu, and then tap XYFX.
•
Press and hold Shift and press Navigate.

When you first enter this mode in a project, you may be prompted to load XYFX to the track. Tap Insert XYFX to do this.
Note: If you already have four insert effects loaded, you will need to clear one of the insert effect slots before doing this.

Use the XYFX Location field to select the signal to which the effects will be applied: the current track (Track) or a main
output (a stereo pair of channels: Output 1/2 or Output 3/4).


---

## Page 262

262

Touch or move your finger on the gridded part of the screen. A marker will follow your finger to indicate the current
position. The X axis is the horizontal axis, increasing in value as you move right. The Y axis is the vertical axis, increasing
in value as you move up. Each axis is labeled with its assigned parameter.
When an effect has a beat division parameter, the current division will be highlighted as an entire column.
Effects are differently colored for easy visual distinction: beat-synchronized effects are blue, while manually controlled
effects are green.

XY Mode with a beat-synchronized effect.

While touching the XY pad, tap Latch in the lower-left corner to keep the marker on the XY pad even after you release it.
The marker will remain there until you touch another part of the XY pad or until you tap Latch again.

Use the Setup button to show or hide the Setup panel, which controls how the XY pad behaves.

Use the Preset field to select the effect you want to use in XYFX Mode.


---

## Page 263

263

XY Mode with a manually controlled effect.

Use the Attack knob to set the length of the attack phase of the envelope, which is triggered when you touch the XY pad.
In other words, this determines how long it takes the effect to fully respond to your touch.

Use the Release knob to set the length of the release phase of the envelope, which is triggered when you release the XY
pad. In other words, this determines how long it takes the effect to fully deactivate after you stop touching the XY pad.

Use the Wet/Dry knob to set the blend the original signal (dry) and the effect signal (wet).

The X Axis and Y Axis fields show which parameters are controlled by each axis. This varies depending on the effect you
are using.


---

## Page 264

264

Macros

Macros Mode (formerly Knobs mode) lets you determine what the various hardware controls can be used for
in other modes. You can use Macros Mode to set up controls for parameters that might not be shown in a
particular mode, or set up controls with multiple parameters across different modes for expressive
performances.

To enter Macros Mode, press Menu, and then tap Macros.

Use the tabs at the bottom of the screen to select a control to assign parameters to:
Knobs
Crossfader
XY Pad
Pad Grid
Env Follower
Click on the links above to jump to that section.

The left side of the screen shows the selected control. Use the Mode field to switch between the different modes for each
control. Some Modes cannot be edited using Macros mode, but you can view their assignments here.

The right side of the screen shows the parameters assigned to the selected controls, and the tools for adding and editing
these parameters.


---

## Page 265

265

Learning Macro Assignments

To learn parameters to a Macro control in user assignable modes:
1. Select a macro control type by tapping one of the buttons at the bottom of the screen: Knob, Crossfader, XY
Pad, Pad Grid or Env Follower. See the following sections for more information on each control type.
2. Select the desired mode for the control by using the Mode field at the top of the screen. See each following
section for explanation of the available modes for each control in Macros mode.
3. When one of these editable modes is selected, the yellow Learn button and the learn add (+) button will appear
on the screen.
To learn a single parameter to the control, tap the yellow Learn button so it is highlighted. The OLED screen
above the selected knob will show LEARNING….
4. Next, navigate to the mode that displays the parameter you would like to learn, and then adjust that parameter.
The screen will show a message, "Learned [parameter] to [macro control]."
5. To lock in the assignment, return to Macros mode and tap the yellow Learn button again. The assigned
parameters will be shown when the macro control is selected.
To learn multiple parameters to a macro, simply navigate to more parameters while Learn is engaged (step 4).
To learn another parameter to a macro that replaces the previous parameter, tap the down arrow next to the yellow
Learn button, and then uncheck the Add box. Repeat the steps above to replace the previously learned parameter with
a new one.
To learn a new parameter while also setting it to a range of values, tap the down arrow next to the yellow Learn
button, and then check the Range box. While Learn is engaged (step 4 above), adjust the parameter to the low and high
points of the value range that you want to control. When the assignment is locked in, the macro will control the parameter
in the set value range.
To use a single macro to, for example, mute/unmute multiple tracks at the same time, tap the down arrow next to
the yellow Learn button, and then check the Toggle box. Repeat the steps above to learn a parameter, which will toggle
on/off when the control is touched or moved.
To use a macro to send the max value of a parameter, tap the down arrow next to the yellow Learn button, and then
check the Trigger box. Repeat the steps above to learn a parameter, which will send its maximum value when the control
is touched or moved.


---

## Page 266

266

Alternatively, you can add parameters by tapping the learn add (+) button, and then using the menu that appears to select
a parameter from your project. The following parameters are available, depending on the selected Mode and the tracks in
your project:

When an Audio Track is selected:
Mixer: Volume, Pan, Mute, Solo, Send 1–4
Insert 1–4: Available parameters depending on the effect

When a Drum Track is selected, and Parameter is set to Track:
Mixer: Volume, Pan, Mute, Solo, Send 1–4
Edit: Global Semi Tune, Global Fine Tune
Insert 1–4: Off, other available parameters depending on the effect

When a Drum Track is selected, and Parameter is set to Pad:
Mixer: Pan, Level, Send 1–4, Pad Mute, Pad Solo
Edit:
Tuning
Amp Env Sustain
Layer Semi Tune (1–4)
LFO to Amp
Velocity to Pan
Filter Cutoff
Filter Env Attack
Layer Fine Tune (1–4)
LFO to Pan
Layer Direction (1–4)
Filter Resonance
Filter Env Hold
Velocity to Start
LFO Wave
Layer Offset (1–4)
Filter Env Amount Filter Env Decay
Vel to Filter Attack
LFO Rate

Amp Env Attack
Filter Env Sustain
Velocity to Env Amount LFO Sync

Amp Env Decay
Filter Env Release
Velocity to Filter
Velocity to Pitch

Amp Env Release Layer Level (1–4)
LFO to Pitch
Vel to Volume Attack
Amp Env Hold
Layer Sample Pan (1–4) LFO to Filter
Velocity to Amp

Insert 1–4: Off, other available parameters depend on the effect

When a Keygroup Track is selected, and Parameter is set to Track:
Mixer: Volume, Pan, Mute, Solo, Send 1–4
Edit: Global Semi Tune, Global Fine Tune
Insert 1–4: Available parameters depending on the effect


---

## Page 267

267

When a Keygroup Track is selected, and Parameter is set to Keygroup:
Mixer: Pan, Level, Send 1–4, Pad Mute, Pad Solo
Insert 1–4: Available parameters depending on the effect

When a Plugin Track is selected:
Mixer: Volume, Pan, Mute, Solo, Send 1–4
Track: Available parameters depending on the plugin
Insert 1–4: Available parameters depending on the effect

When a MIDI Track is selected:
MIDI CC: Standard MIDI control change assignments

When a CV Track is selected:
Edit: CV Out 1–4

When a Return is selected, the following options are available:
Mixer: Volume, Pan, Mute
Insert 1–4: Available parameters depend on the effect

When a Submix is selected, the following options are available:
Mixer: Volume, Pan, Mute
Insert 1–4: Available parameters depend on the effect

When a Main Output is selected, the following options are available:
Mixer: Volume, Pan, Mute
Insert 1–4: Available parameters depend on the effect

To copy an existing macro assignment:
1. Tap the learn add (+) button to open the parameter menu.
2. Select Copy Existing Macro.
3. To replace the current macro settings with the copied macro settings, select Replace.
4. To merge the current macro settings with the copied macro settings, select Merge.
5. Use the menu to select the existing macro you would like to copy.
Note that you can copy between different macro control types, such as knobs and crossfader.


---

## Page 268

268

Tap the Momentary button to turn momentary behavior on or off.
When on, moving the knob will adjust its parameter, but the parameter will immediately return to its original position
(when you turned Momentary on) when you release the knob.
When off, moving the knob will adjust its parameter, and the parameter will remain at its new setting when you release
the knob.
Tap the arrow next to the Momentary to adjust additional settings for when the macro control is released:
To revert the macro parameter(s) to its minimum value on release, check the Go to Minimum box.
To revert to the last value state before the macro was changed on release, check to Go to Previous box.

To rename a macro, tap the keyboard icon in the toolbar, and then use the keyboard to enter a new name.


---

## Page 269

269

Editing Macro Assignments

Above the Macro control tabs on the right side of the touchscreen, the collapsible parameter inspector displays the
settings for the currently selected learned parameter assignment. These settings can be edited for further customization
of the macro.

To edit the parameters assigned to a macro:
1. Tap the macro control on the left side of the screen, or touch or move the control on the Force, to select it.
2. Tap the learned parameter that you would like to adjust on the left side of the screen so it is highlighted gray.
3. Use the parameter inspector to view and adjust the settings for the assignment. Tap the arrow to view additional
settings.
To reverse the polarity of the knob, tap the Flip button.
To adjust the minimum and maximum values sent by the knob, use the two Parameter Range knobs.
To set the response curve of the macro, use the Control Input field to select Linear, Logarithmic or
Exponential. Use the knobs next to this field to set the percentage of the control that will be active.
To adjust the behavior of the macro, use the Toggle selector. When set to Off, moving the control sends a
continuous range of values. When set to Toggle, moving the control toggles between the minimum and
maximum values set above. When set to Trigger Max, moving the control always send the maximum value.
To remove a parameter assignment, tap the trash can icon. If all parameters are removed, the macro will no longer
appear.

You can also quickly edit macro controls using the hardware Edit Buttons:
To edit an existing macro, press and hold the Edit button and then select the macro.
To copy and existing macro to a new macro, press and hold Copy to copy the source macro. Then, tap or press
the control where you would like to paste the macro assignment.
To delete an existing macro, press and hold Delete and tap or press the macro control.


---

## Page 270

270

Knobs

In this tab, you can view and/or edit Knob macro assignments, depending on the Mode selected.

To enter Knobs mode, do either of the following:
•
In Macros Mode, tap the Knobs button at the bottom of the screen.
•
Press and hold Edit and then tap a knob.

To select a mode for the knobs, use the Mode field at the top of the display to select one of the following options:
Volume: In this mode, the knobs are fixed to control track volume.

Pan: In this mode, the knobs are fixed to control track panning.
