# Akai Force User Guide v3.3 (Pages 136-150)

> Chunked conversion from PDF for faster targeted reads.



---

## Page 136

136

Volume

The Volume tab gives you an overview of the volume level of your pads.
Tap a level slider and then use the data dial or –/+ buttons to adjust the volume level of the currently selected pad.
Alternatively, tap and drag the level slider to adjust the volume level.
The level sliders and meters in each pad show a visual representation of the level. Double-tap a track on the screen
to open a large version of the level slider and meter.

Pan & Volume

Use the M and S buttons to mute and solo the pad.
The pan sliders in each track show a visual representation of the pan. Tap a pan slider and then use the data dial or
–/+ buttons to adjust the panning of the currently selected pad.
Tap a level slider and then use the data dial or –/+ buttons to adjust the volume of the currently selected pad.
Alternatively, tap and drag the level slider to adjust the volume level.


---

## Page 137

137

Sends

Use the M and S buttons to mute and solo the pad.
Use the send knobs to adjust the send level of the pads. Tap the knob and use the data dial or –/+ buttons to adjust
the level.
To learn how to use send effects, please see General Features > Effects > Send/Return Effects.
Important: When using send channels, make sure you have already loaded at least one effect to it using the return
mixer.


---

## Page 138

138

Effects

Use the M and S buttons to mute and solo the pad.
Tap the Inserts button to open the Inserts window.
Use the four insert fields to add insert effects to the pad. Empty insert slots will show a + icon. Inserts with a loaded
effect will show the name of the effect.
To learn how to use insert effects, please see General Features > Effects > Insert Effects.

I/O

Use the M and S buttons to mute and solo the pad.
Use the Audio Out field to set the output routing for the pad. Select Track to output the pad to the track, or send it
directly to one of the outputs.


---

## Page 139

139

Browser

The Browser lets you navigate your Force hardware’s internal and external hard disks to load samples, clips,
songs, etc. Using filter buttons and user-definable folders, you can easily adapt it to your preferred workflow.
You can also audition (preview) your samples before loading them.
Important: You can install an additional SATA drive in your Force hardware, allowing for even more storage
space. See Appendix > SATA Drive Installation to learn more about this.
Important: Force supports read and write capability for exFAT, FAT32, NTFS, and EXT4 file systems as well
as read-only capability for HFS+ file systems. We recommend using an exFAT file system as it is the most
robust one supported by both Windows and macOS.

To show the Browser, do any of the following:
•
Press Menu and then tap Browser.
•
Press Load.

In the Browser, you can do any of the following:
To browse your files by location, tap Places on the left side of the screen.
Internal is the internal drive of Force.
Force Documents is a shortcut to the Force Documents folder on the internal drive of Force.
If you have storage devices connected to USB ports or SD card slot of Force, they will appear in this column, as
well.
To browse your files by content, tap Content and then tap the type of file: Audio Clips, Instruments, Midi Clips,
Kits, Samples or Splice (see below to learn about these content buttons).
To browse your Expansions, tap Expansions.
To move up one folder level, tap the folder/ icon in the upper-left corner.
To move through a list, do any of the following:
•
Swipe up or down
•
Turn the data dial
•
Use the –/+ buttons
•
Tap Previous and Next at the bottom of the screen.
To sort the list, tap one of the file list headers to sort by Name, Size, Date Modified or Date Created. Tap the
header again to change the sorting direction. These can be added or removed using the Browser Options window.
To select a file or folder, tap it once.


---

## Page 140

140

To enter a folder, double-tap it or tap Open in the lower-right corner. Alternatively, press the data dial to enter a
selected folder. You can also tap one of the folder buttons (1–5) in the upper-right corner to jump immediately to
those pre-assigned file paths (see below to learn how to assign these file paths).
To load a selected file, double-tap it, tap Load, or press the data dial. If the file is a sample, it will be loaded to the
project’s sample pool. If the file is a project, it will be loaded in its entirety (you will be asked if you want to close your
current project).
When loading files such as clips, samples or kits, you can also use the hardware -/+ buttons or the Previous and
Next function buttons on the display to move through the files and automatically load the selected file to your clip,
pad or track. If the previously selected file is not used elsewhere in your project, it will be deleted from memory.
To delete a selected file or folder, press and hold Shift and then tap Delete File at the bottom of the screen.
To preview a selected sound, tap and hold Play () at the bottom of the screen.
To adjust audition settings, tap the Audition icon at the bottom of the screen. In the screen that appears:
Tap Auto to enable or disable automatic audition when a sound is selected.
Tap and drag the level slider up or down to set the audition volume level.
Tap Sync to enable or disable auditioning samples at the beginning of the next bar of the clip when playback is
active.
Tap Warp to enable or disable samples with an embedded tempo to be warped to the project tempo. Samples
with no embedded tempo or externally-embedded tempo will not be affected by this setting.
Tap the Audition icon once more to hide the window.
To show the information for the current storage device, press and hold Shift and then tap Drive Info at the bottom of
the screen. The drive’s information will appear in a new window. Tap OK to return to the previous screen.
To format a storage device to use an exFAT file system, select it in the Browser, press and hold Shift and then
tap Format Drive at the bottom of the screen. In the window that appears, tap OK and then Format in the next
window to format the device, or tap Cancel to return to the previous screen without formatting. This formatting
process will set the device to use the exFAT file system, remove any partitions from the drive, and erase all of its
content. (Devices that are uninitialized or do not have a file system will not be recognized by the Force hardware and
consequently cannot be formatted.)

To get the most efficient use of the Browser, set the file paths
to your favorite drive locations first. There are five folder
buttons labeled 1–5 in the upper-right corner. You can set
these to be shortcuts to five locations on your Force hardware’s
internal drive and/or any connected storage devices, giving you
quick access to your files.
To assign the current location to a folder button, press and
hold Shift, and then tap one of the folder buttons (1–5). Now,
when you tap that folder button again, the Browser will show that
folder’s content immediately.

Use the six filter buttons to show only specific types of files in
the list below. Folders will still be shown in the list.
To show project files only, tap the P/page icon.
To show pattern files only, tap the bars icon.
To show kit files only, tap the four-squares icon.
To show plugin preset files only, tap the plug icon.
To show sample files only, tap the waveform icon.
To show all file types, tap the three-pages icon.


---

## Page 141

141

To open the Browser Options window, tap the gear icon:
Check the Show file size box to display file size in the file list.
Check the Show modified date box to show the last date the file
was modified in the file list.
Check the Show created date to show the date the file was
created in the file list.
Check the Search includes subfolders box to enable recursive
searching. When enabled, all files, including those in subfolders, will
be appear in the search.
Check the Hide system folders box to disable system folder types
from appearing in the file list.

Use the six Content buttons to show specific locations in the internal
drive of Force and filter them automatically by file type:
Audio Clips: Tap this button to enter the Expansions folder on the
internal drive, viewing audio files only.
Instruments: Tap this button to enter the Expansions folder on the
internal drive, viewing plugin preset files only.
Midi Clips: Tap this button to enter the Expansions folder on the
internal drive, viewing pattern files only.
Kits: Tap this button to enter the Expansions folder on the internal
drive, viewing kit files only.
Samples: Tap this button to enter the Expansions folder on the
internal drive, viewing sample files only.
Splice: Tap this button to enter the Splice folder on the selected
drive, where you can view samples that have been downloaded from
a linked Splice account. The right-side of the browser will display
your Splice samples organized into a series of top-level folders,
allowing you to easily browse your sample library by BPM,
Instrument, Key, Pack or Tag. The All Your Samples folder will
show a list of all samples you have downloaded.
Note: The original sample files from Splice are stored in the By Pack folder on your selected drive. Other folders such
as By Instrument contain internal links to help sort these samples by various tags. If the By Pack folder on your drive
is deleted, the files in the remaining folders will become unusable. To fully remove all files, the entire Splice directory
should be deleted.
IMPORTANT: Drives formatted using the FAT32 system do not support these internal links. For these drives, samples
will only be sorted in the By Pack folder. We recommend using an exFAT file system on external drives used with
Force, as it is the most robust one supported by both Windows and macOS.
See Operation > General Features > Menu > Preferences > Splice for more information on how to connect to your
Splice account.


---

## Page 142

142

Arrange Mode

Arrange Mode is a fully-featured linear sequencer where you can record a clip performance or live input (MIDI
or audio) into a linear timeline to create an arrangement of a song. You can use the powerful Arrange Edit
commands to edit and arrange your song and then mix it down to a stereo audio file, or stem it as separate
tracks.

To enter Arrange Mode, press Menu and then tap Arrange. The event editor's Arrange, Grid, Clip and List views are
displayed as tabs in the top left of the screen to make it easy to jump between them.

The toolbar at the top of Arrange Mode lets you switch between the different edit modes as well as showing project and
timing information.
Use the Arrange, Grid, Clip and List icons to switch between the different Force modes.
Tap the automation icon to toggle between Read and Write. To disable or enable global automation entirely, press
and hold Shift and tap this icon.
Use the BPM field to adjust the tempo of the project.
Use the Bars field to set the length of the arrangement.
The time counter at the top of the screen indicates the current playhead position. Double-tap this field to open the
Locate Popup.
Tap the pencil icon to open the Arrange Edit window.
Tap the gear icon to open the Grid Settings.


---

## Page 143

143

The project's tracks are displayed in Arrange Mode on a linear timeline. Each track header will show Record Arm, Track
Automation and Crossfader Assign states. Note that this requires the vertical zoom to be adjusted so there is enough
space to show all components. Use the pinch and expand gestures to change the zoom level of the arrangement.

To open the Timing Correct window, tap TC at the bottom of the screen. Alternatively, tap the timing correct value
shown above the track headers. See General Features > Timing Correct (TC) to learn about this.
To view Return and Output bus tracks, tap Buses or press the Master button. You can then record, edit and view
automation data on these tracks in your Arrangement. See Addenda > Updates in Force 3.1 > New Features > Bus
Automation for more information.
To enable or disable MIDI record erasing in Arrange Mode, tap the MIDI Rec Erase button at the bottom of the screen.
When enabled, the new recording will replace existing MIDI data in the arrangement. When disabled, recording MIDI will
overdub on existing MIDI data in the track arrangement.
To enable or disable loop, tap Loop at the bottom of the screen.
To return playback of all tracks to the recorded arrangement, tap the Back to Arrange button.

The Arrangement timeline also features six user-controllable Locate markers. Press and hold Shift to show the six Locator
buttons at the bottom of the screen.
To add a locator at the playhead position, tap one of the six Locator buttons. You can also use the Locate Popup
to edit these markers.

To record a clip performance into Force's arrangement timeline:
1. You must first configure the Record button to point to the linear
arrangement rather than the clip matrix. You can set this by
doing either of the following:
•
Hold Shift and press the REC button.
•
Press and hold the REC button to open the Start
Recording Selector window, and then tap To
Arrangement.
2. Next, enter Arrange mode by pressing Menu and tapping Arrange.
3. Trigger a clip or scene to begin recording. As clips are triggered, Arrange Mode will draw regions containing audio
or MIDI data into the track lanes.


---

## Page 144

144

To replace a section of the arrangement with a new clip performance:
1. Tap the Loop button at the bottom of the screen to activate loop.
2. Set the Loop Start and Loop End points by tapping and dragging the beginning and end of the loop region in the
timeline. Tapping and dragging in the middle of the loop region moves both the Loop Start and Loop End points
at the same time.
3. Enable arrangement recording by following the directions above.
4. Trigger a clip or scene to begin recording. The recording will begin at the Loop Start point and finishes at the Loop
End point, making it easy to replace a section of the arrangement.

To play the arrangement:
•
Press Play to begin playback of the arrangement from 1:1:00, or if Loop is activated, from the Loop Start.
•
Hold Shift and press Play to begin playback from the current playhead position.

To move the playhead position, tap the Playhead Position field in the toolbar to select it, and then use the data dial or
-/+ buttons to adjust the value. Alternatively, you can set the playhead position by tapping in the lower-half of the timeline.

Switching Between the Arrangement and Clips

For each track in Force, you can play a clip or play the linear arrangement, but never both at the same time. When you
trigger a clip, the arrangement on that track will stop playing; conversely, if you are triggering clips and then play the
arrangement, the clips will stop.
In Arrange Mode, a track will show the Back to Track icon (a square with a play symbol shown on the right side of the
track lane) when either there is a clip playing or the Stop All button has been pressed.
To return playback of a track to its linear arrangement, simply tap the Back to Track icon.
To return all tracks to the linear arrangement, tap the Back to Arrange button at the bottom of the screen in
Arrange Mode.
You can also set the track's playback type from Clip Matrix Mode or Force's launch pad mode. Hold Shift and press the
Launch button to open the Launch Config window. Select the Show arrangement in clip matrix option so it is enabled.
The arrangement row will appear as the top row of pads above the first row of clips in Matrix/Launch mode. Tapping a
pad in the arrangement row will stop playing any clips on the respective track and play the linear arrangement. Tapping
the Scene Launch button for the arrangement row will play the linear arrangement for all tracks.


---

## Page 145

145

Editing Arrangements

You can edit your linear arrangement using Force's powerful Arrange Edit commands.
To edit an arrangement, tap the pencil icon in the Arrange Mode toolbar to open the Arrange Edit window, and then
select one of the following tools.

The Erase function erases all or part of a track.
To select the track you want to erase within the sequence, use
the Track field.
To set the time range of the track you want to erase, use the
Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The left fields set the start of the time
range, and the right fields set the end of the time range.
To select what types of events you erase, select one of the Erase
options:
All erases all pad events from the designated time range and
reset all of its settings.
Automation erases only automation from the designated time
range. Use the Parameter field to select what type of
automation is erased.
To confirm your choice, tap Do It.
To cancel and return to the previous screen, tap the X, Cancel,
or anywhere outside the window.

The Clear function erases all events from the track and resets all of its
settings.
To confirm your choice, tap Clear.
To return to the previous screen, tap Cancel.

The Trim function immediately crops the arrangement to the Bars value
in the main Arrangement Mode window.


---

## Page 146

146

The Transpose function transposes a range of events on a track in an
arrangement. The events within that range will shift accordingly in the
Grid View. This option is available for MIDI tracks only.
To select the track you want to transpose within the
arrangement, use the Track field.
To set the time range of the arrangement you want to
transpose, use the two sets of Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The left
fields set the start of the time range, and the right fields set the end
of the time range.
For drum tracks, use the two Pad fields to select the “source” pad
(whose events you want to move) and “destination” pad (where the
events will be placed). Tap each field and then press the desired pad.
For keygroup tracks, plugin tracks, and MIDI tracks, set the
range and amount of transposition:
Range: Use the two Note fields to set the range of notes of the
events you want to transpose. Note events within this range will
be transposed, while note events outside of this range will
remain unchanged.
Transpose: Use this field to set how many semitones up or
down you want to transpose the note events.
To confirm your choice, tap Do It.
To cancel and return to the previous screen, tap the X, Cancel,
or anywhere outside the window.

The Delete Bars function removes a range of bars from the
arrangement.
To set the range of bars to delete from the arrangement, use
the First Bar and Last Bar fields.
To confirm your choice, tap Do It.
To cancel and return to the previous screen, tap the X, Cancel,
or anywhere outside the window.

The Insert Bars function adds a number of bars to the arrangement.
To set how many bars to add, use the # of bars field.
To set where the bars are added, use the Before Bar field. The
bars will be inserted before this bar.
To confirm your choice, tap Do It.
To cancel and return to the previous screen, tap the X, Cancel,
or anywhere outside the window.

The Half Length function immediately halves the length of the
arrangement.

The Double Length function immediately doubles the length of the
arrangement.


---

## Page 147

147

The Copy Bars function copies a range of bars from the arrangement
and adds them at a specified point.
To set the range of bars to copy from the arrangement, use the
First Bar and Last Bar fields.
To set where you want to add the copied bars, use the After Bar
field. The copied bars will be inserted after this one.
To set how many instances of the copied bars you want to add,
use the Copies field.
To overwrite the arrangement at the destination, tap Replace.
To add the events to the destination without erasing anything,
tap Merge.
To cancel and return to Arrange Mode, tap Cancel.

The Copy Events function copies a range of events or selected audio
track regions from the arrangement and adds them to another at a
specified point.
To select the “source” track, use the From Track field. This is the
track whose content you want to copy.
To set what content is copied, use the field below the From Track
field. Copy All Events will copy and paste all events in the track.
Copy Only Selected Events will copy and paste only the events
that are currently selected.
To set the time range of the events or the audio track you want
to copy, use the Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The left fields set the
start of the time range, and the right fields set the end of the time
range.
To select the “destination” track, use the To Track field. This is
the track where the content of the source track will be copied.
To set where you want to add the copied events or audio track,
use the Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The events or audio track will be
added after this point.
To set how many instances of the copied events or audio track
you want to add, use the Copies field.
To overwrite the arrangement at the destination, tap Replace.
To add the events to the arrangement at the destination
without erasing anything, tap Merge.
To cancel and return to Arrange Mode, tap Cancel.


---

## Page 148

148

In Arrange Mode, you can tap and hold on the header for an audio track (on the left side of the screen) to open a dropdown menu of Track Edit options for audio tracks.

The Clear function erases all events from the track and resets all of its settings.
To confirm your choice, tap Clear.
To return to the previous screen, tap Cancel.

The Copy Track function immediately duplicates the selected track to a new track.

The Copy Events function copies selected audio track regions from the track and adds them to another at a specified
point.
To select the “source” track, use the From Track field. This is the track whose content you want to copy.
To set what content is copied, use the field below the From Track field. Copy All Events will copy and paste all
events in the track. Copy Only Selected Events will copy and paste only the events that are currently selected.
To set the time range of the events or the audio track you want to copy, use the Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The
left fields set the start of the time range, and the right fields set the end of the time range.
To select the “destination” track, use the To Track field. This is the track where the content of the source track will
be copied.
To set where you want to add the copied events or audio track, use the Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The events or
audio track will be added after this point.
To set how many instances of the copied events or audio track you want to add, use the Copies field.
To overwrite the arrangement at the destination, tap Replace.
To add the events to the arrangement at the destination without erasing anything, tap Merge.
To cancel and return to Arrange Mode, tap Cancel.


---

## Page 149

149

The Reset Channel Strip function immediately:
•
clears all Insert effect slots;
•
turns Mute, Solo, automation, and Monitor off;
•
resets the pan knob to the center;
•
resets the level slider to 0.00 dB; and
•
turns the Record Arm button off.

The Bounce to Sample function immediately renders the track as an audio sample and places it in the project’s sample
pool. By default, it will be named Bounce - and appended with the track name.

The Flatten Track function immediately renders all edits and regions within the current track's arrangement to a new
audio file.

The Flatten Track Elastique function also immediately renders all edits and regions within the current track's
arrangement to a new audio file, but renders any time-stretching or pitch-shifting using the Elastique Pro algorithm,
providing higher-quality results with less artifacts than Force's standard algorithm.


---

## Page 150

150

You can also tap and hold on the header for a MIDI track (on the left side of the screen) to open a drop-down menu of
Track Edit options for MIDI tracks.

The Clear function erases all events from the track and resets all of its settings.
To confirm your choice, tap Clear.
To return to the previous screen, tap Cancel.

The Copy Track function immediately duplicates the selected track to a new track.

The Copy Events function copies a range of events from the
arrangement and adds them to another at a specified point.
To select the “source” track, use the From Track field. This is the
track whose content you want to copy.
To set what content is copied, use the field below the From Track
field. Copy All Events will copy and paste all events in the track.
Copy Only Selected Events will copy and paste only the events
that are currently selected.
To set the time range of the events or the audio track you want
to copy, use the Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The left fields set the
start of the time range, and the right fields set the end of the time
range.
To select the “destination” track, use the To Track field. This is
the track where the content of the source track will be copied.
To set where you want to add the copied events or audio track,
use the Bar, Beat, and Tick fields. The events or audio track will be
added after this point.
To set how many instances of the copied events or audio track
you want to add, use the Copies field.
To overwrite the arrangement at the destination, tap Replace.
To add the events to the arrangement at the destination
without erasing anything, tap Merge.
To cancel and return to Arrange Mode, tap Cancel.
